Based upon the original Bloom's Taxonomy. this new book helps teachers understand and
implement a standards-based curriculum.
An extraordinary group of cognitive psychologists. curriculum specialists. teacher-educators.
and rescarchers have developed a two-dimensional framework. focusing on knowledge.
steps. and cognitive processes, that define what students are cxpected to learn in school. A
series 01' vignettes- written by and for teachcrs- illustrates how to use this unigue framework.
i\dvance praise for A Tl/.wI/IJIHI"./(¡r Lel/mil/g. Tf.'l/chillg. l/I/{I Assf.'ssillg
"1 would want 10 see this book adopted for use in the teacher education program where I
tcach . . .. This should be a book that is found in the professionallibrary of cvery teacher."
-James M. Applefield, UNC- Wilmington
"1 am vcry impressed with this work and believe it will be a valuable tool for teachers.
curriculum developers, and others involved with teaching and learning. It should become
a mandatory reference for all individuals preparing 10 beco me teachers."
- James R. Johnson. University of Pennsylvania
", am convinced that the revised version 01' the Taxonomy will serve as an invaluabic
resource to pre-service and in-service tcachers. lt was a pleasure to review this manuscript.
I am looking forward to its publication."
-Wayne H. Slater. University of Maryland
"Thc book is a worthy successor to "Bloom\ Taxonomy." It has been carefully thought out
and bids fair to becoming a landmark deserving a status egual to that of its forerunner."
- Nathaniel L. Gage. Stanford University
", am illlpressed with the team of educational rescarchers and practitioners that the puhlisher
has asselllbled to bring the original Taxonomy into step with current understandings 01'
learning and tcaching. For those working in classrooms and in curricululll developlllent.
there is much here that can prove invaluahle. Again, , applaud the authors for the thoughtful
and effective way in which they have undcrtaken this project. The goal is laudable and the
product is effective."
- Patricia Alexander. University 01' Maryland
A T{I.IDIIOIHI·.!(¡r Lf.'{/mil1g. Tel/chil/g. {I1/(1 Assessillg is also available in a hardcover editioll
which includes an additional section-The Taxonollly in Perspective-compriscd 01' three
chapters and an appcndix that provides an historical perspective.
Thc ISBN for the hardcover edition is 0-321-08405-5.
For related titles and
support material s, visit our
online catalog at www.ablongman.com
Pearson
Education
---
I ABRIDGED EDITION I
A
AXO OMY
------FOIt ------
~EAR ING ,
,ING,
ANO
ASSESSING
EDITORS
LORIN w. ANDERSON ANO DAVID R. KRATHWOHL
PETER W. AIRASIAN, KATHLEEN A. CRUIKSHANK,
RICHARD E. MAYER, PAUL R. PINTRICH,
JAMES RATHS, MERLlN C. WITTROCK
3.1 THE TAXONOMY TABLE
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
1. REMEMBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLY 4. ANALYZE 5. EVALUATE 6. CREATE A.
FACTUAL KNOWLEDGE B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLI!:DGE
C.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLI!:DGE
D. META- COGNITIVE
KNOWLI!DGE
4.1 THE KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION
MA.lOR TYPES AND SUBTYPES EXAMPLES
A. PACTVAL KNOWLltDOB-The baste e1ernents students must know to be a("quainh!d with a
diGCipUn<. or solve probJems in ít
AA. Knowledge of terminology Technica1 vocabulary, music symbols
AB. Knowledge oE specific details and Major nátural resources, reliable sources of
elements information
IS. CONCEPTUAL I<NOWL~DO",-The interrelationships among the basic elements within a larger
structun> that enable them to fundíon together
BA. Knowledge of classifications and Periods of geological time, forms of business
categories ownership
BB. Knowledge of principIes and Pythagorean theorem, law of supply and demand
generalizations
Be. Knowledge of theories, models, and Theory of evolution, structure of Congress
structures
C. I"ROCEDURAL KNOWLE"'E-How to do something, methods of inquiry, and criteria for using
skills, algorithms, techniques, and J!U'thods
CA. Knowledge of subject-specific skills and Skills used in painting with water colors,
algorithms whole-number division algorithm
CB. Knowledge of subject-specific techniques Interviewing techniques, scientific method
andmethods
Ce. Knowledge of criteria for determining Criteria used to determine when to apply a
when to use appropriate procedures procedure involving Newton's second law, criteria
used to judge the feasibility of using a partic1.!lar
method to estimate business costs
D. METACOGNITIVE KNOWLltDOE-KnOWledge of eognition in general as well as awarent!S. and
knowledge of one' s own cognition
DA. Strategic knowledge Knowledge of outlining as a means of capturing
the structure of a unit of subject matter in a text
book, knowledge of the use of heurístics
DB. Knowledge about cognitive tasks, Knowledge of the types of tests particular teachers
including appropriate contextual and administer, knowledge of the cognitive demands
conditional knowledge of different· tasks
De. Self-knowledge Knowledge that critiquing essays ís a personal
strength, whereas writing essays is a personal
weakness; awareness of one's own knowledge
level
.
5.1 THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
CATEG~RIES
& COGNITIVE PROCESSES ALTERNATIVE
NAMES DEFINITIONS AND EXAMPLES
t •• "IIMBER-Reldew relevantlcnowledge from long-tmn meDIO!)'
1.1 RECOGNIZING Identifying Locating knowledge in long-term memory that is consistent
with presented material (e.g., Recognize the dates of
important events in U.S. history)
'.2 RI!!:CALLING Retrieving Retrieving relevant knowledge from long-term memory
(e.g., Recall the dates of important events in U.S. history)
2. graphic communlcation
uNDln'.TAND-Coostruct meaning from instructiónalmessages, inc1udinJ> oral, WIitten, and ·
2.1 INTERPRItTING Clarifying, paraphrasing, representing, translating
Changing from one form of representation (e.g., numerical)
to another (e.g., verbal) (e.g., Paraphrase important speeches
and documents)
2.2 EXIt, MPLlFYING illustrating, instantiating Finding a specific example or illustration of a concept or prin-
ciple (e.g., Give examples of various artistic painting styles)
2.3 CLASSIFYING Categorizing, subsuming Determining that something belongs to a category
(e.g., Classify observed or described cases of mental
disorders)
2.4 SUMMARIZING Abstracting, generalizing Abstracting a general theme or major point(s) (e.g. Write a
short summary óf the event portrayed on a videotape)
2.5 INPERRING Concluding, extrapolating, interpolating, predicting
Drawing a logical conclusion from presented information
(e.g., In learning a foreign language, infer grammatical
principies from examples)
2.6 COMPARING Contrasting, mapping, matching Detecting correspondences between two ideas, objects, and
the like (e.g., Compare historical events to contemporary
situations)
2.7 EXPLAlP'tlrtG Constructing Constructing a cause-and-effect model of a system(e.g., ex-
models plain the causes of iIÍlportant 18th Century events in France)
3. APPLV-Carry out ar use a procedure in a given slhliltion
3.1 EXI!:CUTING Carrying out Applying a procedure to a familiar task (e.g., Divide one
whole number by another whole number, both with
multiple digits)
3.2 IMPLEMa:NTING Using Applying a procedure to an unfamiliar task (e.g., Use New-
ton's Second Law in situations in which it is appropriate)
J
'1 1,
i
5.1 THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION (CONTINUED)
CATEGORIES
Be COGNITIVE PROCESSES ALTERNATIVE
NAMES DEFINITIONS A""D EXAMPLES
4. ANALVZE-Break material inlo its constituent parts and determine how the parts relate to.one
. another and to an O\'erall slrudure or purpose -· x .•
' ....
4.1 DIFFERENTlATING Discriminating, distinguishing, focusing, selecting Distinguishing relevant from irrelevant parts or impor-
tant from unimportant parts of presented material
(e.g., Distinguish between relevant and irrelevant
numbers in a mathematical word problem)
4.2 ORGANIZING Finding coherence, intergrating, outlining, parsing,
structuring
Determining how elements fit or function within a
structure (e.g.; Structure evidence in a historical
description into evidence for and against a particular
historical explanation)
4 .3 ATTRIBUTING Deconstructing Determine a point of view, bias, values, or intent under-
lying presented material (e.g., Determine the point of
view of the author of an essay in terms of his or her
political perspecti ve)
5. EVALUATE-Make judgments based on eritecia and standards
5.1 CHECKINO Coordinating, detecting, monitoring, testing Detecting inconsistencies or fallacies within a process or
product; determining whether a process or product has
internal cansistency; detecting the effectiveness of a pro-
cedure as it is being implemented (e.g., Determine if a
scientis!'s conclusions follow from observed data)
5.2 CRITIQUING Judging Detecting incansistencies between a product and exter-
nal criteria, determining whether a product has exter-
nal consistency; detecting the appropriateness of a pro-
cedure for a g;ven problem (e.g., Judge which of two
methods is the best way to solve a given problem)
6. CREATE-Put elements together to form a coherent or functional whole: reorganize elemenló
into a new pattero or s. tructure
6.1 GENERATING Hypothesizing Coming up with alternative hypotheses based on
criteria (e.g., Generate hypotheses to account far an
observed phenomenon)
6.2 PLANNING Designing Devising a procedure for accomplishing sorne task (e.g.,
Plan a research paper on a given historical topic)
6.3 PRODUCJNG Constructing Inventing a product (e.g., Build habita!s for a specific
purpose)
1
A Taxonomy for
Learning, Teaching,
and Assessing
A Revision of Bloom 's
Taxonomyof
Educational Objectives
ABR I DGED EDITION
EDITORS
LORIN W. ANDERSON
DAVID R. KRATHWOHL
PETER W. AIRASIAN
KATHLEEN A. CRUIKSHANK
RICHARD E. MAYER
PAUL R. PINTRICH
JAMES RATHS
MERLIN C. WITTROCK
New York San Francisco Boston
London Toronto Sydney Tokyo Singapore Madrid
Mexieo City Munich Paris Cape Town Hong Kong Montreal
Series Editor: Amis E. Burvikovs
Acquisitions Editor: Aurora Martinez-Ramos
Marketing Manager.;; Brad Parkins, Kathleen Morgan
Production Manager: Donna DeBenedictis
Project Coordination, Text Design, and Electronic Page Makeup: Pre-Press Company, Inc.
Cover Design Manager: Linda Knowles
Manufacturing Buyer: Megan Cocruan
For permission to use copyrighted material, grateful acknowledgment is made to the copy-
right holders on pp. 287, which are hereby made part 01 this copyright page.
llbrary 01 Congress Cataloging-in-Publieation Dala
A taxonomy for leaming, teaching, and assessing : a revision oí Bloom's taxonomy of
educational objectives / editors, Lorin W. Anderson, David R. I<rathwohl ; with Peter W.
Airasian ... lel al.].
p.cm.
Inc1udes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-321-08405-5 (hardcover; alk. paper) -- ISBN 0-8013-1903-X (softeover; alk. paper)
1. Bloom, Benjamin Samuel, 1913- Taxonomy of educationaJ objectives. 2.
Education--Aims and objectives. 1. Anderson, Lorin W. n. Krathwohl, David R. m.
Bloom, Benjarnin Sarnuel, 1913- Taxonomy 01 educational objectives.
LBI7.T29 2001
370'.I--dc21 00-063423
This book is a revision of The Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, The Classiftcation 01 Edu-
cational GoaIs, Handbook 1: Cognitive Doma;n, Benjamin S. Bloom' (Ed.), Max D, Englehart,
Edward J. Furst, Walker H. HiIl, and David R. Krathwohl, published by David McKay Com-
pany, Ine., New York, 1956.
Copyright © 2001 by Addison Wesley Longman, Ine.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval5YS-
tem, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recordin~ or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. Printed in the
United States.
Please visit OOI website at http://www.ablongman.com
ISBN 0-8013-1903-X (softcover)
67891{}-{J3
This volume is dedicated to
those teachers who advance
the learning and development
Of their students every day;
we hope they find it he/pful.
Brief Contents
xix
De/ailed Contents xi
List of Tables and Figures Preface xxi
Foreword xxvii
SECTION 1 I The Taxonomy: Educational Objectives and Student Leaming 1
CHAPTER I Introduction 3
CHAPTER 2 The Structure, Specificity, and Problems olObjectives 12
SECTION 11 I The Revised Taxonomy Structure CHAPTER 3 TheTaxonomyTable 27
CHAPTER 4 The Knowledge Dimension 38
CHAPTER l5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 63
25
SECTION 111 I The Taxonomy in Use 93
CHAPTER 6 Using the Taxonomy Table 95
CHAPTER 7 Introduction to the Vignettes 110
CHAPTER 8 Nutrition Vignette 119
CHAPTER 9 Macbeth Vignette 136
CHAPTER 10 Addition Facts Vignette 158
CHAPTI!:R I t Parliamentary Acts Vignette 171
CHAPTER t 2 Volcanoes? Here? Vignette 190
CHAPTER t 3 Report Writing Vignette 210
CHAPTI!:R t 4 Addressing Long-standing Problems in
ClassTOom Instruction 232
IX
x Brief Contents
Appendixes 261
Appendix A: Summary of the Changes from
the Original Framework 263
Appendix B: Condensed Version of the Original Taxonomy
of Educational Objectives: Cognitive Domain 279
271
References
Credits
Index
287
289
SECTION 1 Detailed Contents
List ofTables and Figures xix
Preface xxi
Foreword xxvii
The Taxonorny: Educational Objectives
and Student Leaming 1
CHAPTER I Introduction 3
The Need for a Taxonomy 3
Using Our Increased Understanding 6
The Taxonomy Table, Objectives, and Instructional Time 6
The Taxonomy Table and Inslruction 7
The Taxonomy Table and Assessment 8
The Concept of Alignment 10
Teachers as Curriculum Makers Versus Teachers as Curriculum
Implementers: A Closing Comment 10
CHAPTER 2 The Structure, Specificity, and Problems olObjectives 12
The Structure of Objectives 12
Content Versus Knowledge 12
Behavior Versus Cognitive Processes 13
Specificity of Objectives 15
Global Objectives 15
Educational Objectives 15
Inslructional Objectives 16
Summary of Levels of Objectives 16
What Objectives Are Not 17
XI
XII Detailed Contents
A Changing Vocabulary of Objectives 18
Problems wilh Objectives 20
Specificity and Inclusiveness 20
The Lock-Step Nature of Objectives 21
What Does an Objective Represent-Learning
or Performance? 21
The Restricted Use of Objectives 22
Concluding Comment 23
SECTION 11
I The Revised Taxonomy Structure 25
CHAPTER 3 The Taxonomy Table 27
Categories of lhe Knowledge Dimension 27
Categories of lhe Cognitive Process Dimension 30
The Taxonomy Table and Objectives: A Diagrarnmatic
Surnmary 30
Why Categorize Objectives? 34
Our Use of MultipleForms of Definition 36
Verbal Descriptions' 36
Sample Objectives 37
Sample Assessment Tasks 37
Sample Instructional Activities
Closing Cornment: A Look Ahead
37
37
CHAPTER 4
The Knowledge Dimension 38
A Distinction Between Knowledge and Subject MaUer Content:
A Tale of Four Teachers 39
Different Types of Knowledge 40
A Distinction Between Factual and Conceptual
Knowledge 41
A Rationale for Metacognitive Knowledge 43
Categories of the Knowledge Dimension 45
Factual Knowledge 45
Knowledge of Terminology 45
Knowledge of Specific Details and Elements
47
Conceptual Knowledge 48
Knowledge of Classifications and Categories
Knowledge of Principies and Generalizations
49
51
Knowledge of Theories, Models, and Structures
51
Detailed Contents XIII
Procedural Knowledge 52
Knowledge of Subject-Specific Skills and AIgorithms 53
Knowledge of Subject-Specific Techniques and Melhods Knowledge of Criteria for Determining when to Use
Appropriate Procedures 54
Metacognitive Knowledge 55
Strategic Knowledge 56
Knowledge About Cognitive Tasks Including Contextual and
Conditional Knowledge 57
Self-Knowledge 59
Assessing Objectives Involving Metacognitive Knowledge 60
Conclusion 62
54
CHAPTER 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 63
A Tale of Three Learning Outcomes 64
No Learning 64
Rote Learning 64
Meaningful Learning 64
Meaningful Learning as Constructing Knowledge
Frarneworks 65
Cognitive Processes for Retention and Transfer The Categories of the Cognitive Process Dimension Remember 66
Recognizing 69
Recalling 69
Understand 70
Interpreting 70
Exemplifying 71
Classifying 72
Surnmarizing 73
Inferring 73
Comparing 75
Explaining 75
Apply 77
Executing 77
Implementing 78
Analyze 79
Differentiating 80
65
66
XIV Detailed Contents
Organizing 81
Attributing 82
Evaluate 83
Checking 83
Critiqlring 84
Create 84
Generating 86
Planning 87
Producing 87
Decoritextualized and Contextualized Cognitive Processes
An Example oí Educational Objectives in Context 89
Remembering What Was Leamed 90
Making Sense oí and Using What Was Leamed 90
ConcIusion 91
SECTION 111
I The Taxonomy in Use 93
CHAPTER 6 Usíng the Taxonomy Table 95
Using the Taxonomy Table in AnaIyzing Your Own Work
Using the Taxonomy Table in Analyzing !he Work oí Others
The Taxonomy Table Revisited 97
The Leaming Question 97
The lnstruction Question 99
The Assessment Question 101
The Alignment Question 102
Problems in Classifying Objectives 105
The Level oí Specificity Problem 105
The Prior Leaming Problem 105
Difíerentiating Objectives from Activities 106
Sorne Helpful Hints 107
Consider the Verb-Noun Combination
Relate Type of Knowledge to Process
Make Sure You Have !he Right Noun
107
107
108
Rely on Multiple Sources 109
CHAPTER 7
Introduction to the Vignettes 110
Characterization of !he Vígnettes 110
The Curriculum Unit 111
88
95
96
Detailed Contents XV
112
Central Components oí !he Vígnette Descriptions
Using the Taxonomy Table to Analyze !he
Vignettes 114
The AnaIytic Process: A Summary 117
Organization and Structure oí !he Vignette
Chapters 117
A Closing Comment 118
CHAPTER 8 Nutrition Vignette 119
Section 1: Objectives 119
Section 1I: lnstructional Activities 120
Section llI: Assessment 127
Section IV: Closing Commentary 128
The Learning Question 128
The lnstruction Question 128
The Assessment Question 130
The Alignment Question 130
Section V: Closing Questions 131
Attachments 133
CHAPTER 9 Macbeth Vignette 136
Part 1: Objectives 137
Part II: lnstructional Activities 137
Part ID: Assessment 143
Part IV: Closing Commentary 146
The Leaming Question 146
The lnstruction Question 146
The Assessment Question 148
The Alignment Question 148
Par! V: Closing Questions 149
Attachments 151
CHAPTER 10 Addition Fads Vignette 158
Part 1: Objectives 158
Part II: lnstructional Activities 159
Part ID: Assessment 165
Part IV: Closing Commentary 168
The Learning Question 168
The lnstruction Question 168
XVI Detailed Contents
The Assessmenl Question 169
The Alignmenl Question 169
Parl V: Closing Queslions 169
CHAPTER 11 Parliamentary Acts Vignette 171
ParlI: Objectives 171
Parl II: Instruclional Activities 173
Parl III: Assessmenl 180
Parl N: Closing Cornmenlary
182
The Learning Question
The Instruction Question
The Assessmenl Question
The Alignmenl Question
182
184
184
184
Parl V: Closing Questions
184
Attachmenls 186
CHAPTER 12
Volcanoes? Here? Vignette
190
Par! 1: Objectives 190
Parl II: Instructional Activities
191
Parl III: Assessmenl 201
Parl N: Closing Cornmenlary
205
The Learning Question
205
The Instruction Question
205
The Assessmenl Question 205
The Alignmenl Question 205
Parl V: Closing Questions 206
Attachmenls 208
CHAPTER 13 Report Writing Vignette 210
Parl 1: Objectives 210
Parl II: Instructional Activities 213
Parl III: Assessmenl 220
Par! N: Closing Commenlary 223
The Learning Question 223
The Instruction Question 223
Detailed Contents
XVII
The Assessmenl Question 225
The Alignmenl Question 225
Parl V: Closing Questions 226
Altachmenls 228
CHAPTER 14 Addressing Long-Standing Problems in Classroom
Insfruction 232
Generalizations Relaled lo Ihe Learning Question 234
Using Complex Processes lo Facililale Maslery of Simpler
Objectives 234
Choosing Varielies of Knowledge 236
Generalizations Relaled lo Ihe Instruction Question 239
Recognizing Links Between Knowledge Types and
Cognitive Processes 239
Differentiating Instructional Activities from Objeclives
Generalizalions Relaled lo Ihe Assessmenl Question Using Summalive and Formative Assessments
245
245
Dealing wilh Exlernal Assessments 248
Generalizations Relaled lo Ihe Alignmenl Question
250
Aligning Assessments wilh Objectives 250
Aligning Instructional Aclivities wilh Assessmenls
253
Aligning Instructional Activities wilh Objectives
255
A Final Cornmenl 256
Unsolved Problerns 257
The Time Demands of Analysis 257
The Linkage of Objectives and Inslruction 257
Lack of Progress in Multiple-Choice Item Formals Relalionship lo a Theory of Learning and Cognition 258
258
Relationships Among Ihe Domains 258
In Closing 259
242
I Appendixes
Appendix A: Summary of the Changes from the Original Framework Four Changes in Emphasis 263
Four Changes in Terminology 265
263
XVIII Detailed Contents
Four Changes in Structure 266
The Inclusion of Understanding and the Omission of Problem Solving and Critica! Thinking 269
Appendix B: Condensed Version of the Origi""l Taxonomy of Educatio""l
Objectives: Cognitive Domain 271
List of Tables and Figures
References 279
Credits 287
Index 289
TABLE 2.' Relationship of Global, Educational, and Instructional Objectives 17
TABLE 3.1 The Taxonomy Table 28
TABLE 3.2 The Major Types and Subtypes of the Knowledge Dimension 29
TABLE 3.3 The Six Categories of the Cognitive Process Dimension
and Related Cognitive Processes 31
FIGURE 3.1 How an Objective Is Classified in the Taxonomy Table 32
TABLE 4 . 1 The Knowledge Dimension 46
TABLE 5.1 The Cognitive Process Dimension 67
TABLE 11.2 Completed Taxonomy Table fvr Hypothetical Ohm's Ú1W Unit 92
TABLE B.I Placement of the Objective in the Taxonomy Table 98
TABLE 8.2 Placement of the Objective and Instructional Activities in the Taxonomy Table TABLE 6.3 Placement of the Objective, lnstructional Activities, and Assessment in the
Taxonomy Table 103
TABLE 7.1 Our Collection ofVignettes 111
TABLE 7 .2 Elements Relevant to Taxonomic Analysis of the Vignettes 115
TABLE B . I Analysis of the Nutrition Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Stated Objectives 121 .
TABLE B.2 Analysis of the Nutrition Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on lnstructional Activities 124
TABLE B .3 Analysis of the Nutrition Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Assessments 129
TABLE 11.1 Analysis of the Macbeth Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Stated Objectives 138
TABLE 11.2 Analysis of the Macbeth Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Instructional Activities 144
TABL" 11.3 Analysis of the Macbeth Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Assessments 147
TABLE 10.1 Analysis of the Addition Facts Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Stated Objectives 160
TABLE 10.2 Analysis of the Addition Facts Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Instruetional Activities 165
TABLE 10.3 Analysis of the Addition Facts Vignelte in Terms of ¡he Taxonomy Table
Based on Assessments 167
100
XIX
xx Lis! of Tables and Figures
TABLE 11.1 TABLE 11.2 TABLE 11.3 TABLE 12.1 TABLE 12.2 TA BLE 12.3 TABLE 13.1 TABLE 13.2 TABLE 13.3 FIGURE A.I Analysis of the Parliamentary Aets Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Stated Objeetives 174
Analysis of the Parliamentary Acts Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Instruetional Activities 179
Analysis of the Parliamentary Aets Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Assessments 183
Analysis of the Volcanoes Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Stated Objectives 192
Analysis of the Voleanoes Vignette in Terms uf the Taxonomy Table
Based on [nstruetional Aetivities 202
Analysis of the Voleanoes Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Assessments 204
Analysis of the Report Writing Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Stated Objectives 213
Analysis of the Report Writing Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on [nstTUetional Activities 221
Analysis of the Report Writing Vignette in Terms of the Taxonomy Table
Based on Assessments 224
Summary of the StTUctural Changes from the Original Framework
to the Revision 268
I
1.
!
,
Preface
In 1956 a framework for categorizing educational objectives was published by
B. S. Bloom (editor), M. D. Engelhart, E. J. Furst, W. H. Hill, and D. R. Krath-
wohl as The Taxonomy of Edueational Objeetives, The Classifieation of Educational
Goals, Handbook [: Cognitive Domain.' Since ils publication over 40 years ago, fue
Handbook has been translated into more fuan twenty languages (Krathwohl,
1994) and has provided a basis for test design and currículum development not
only in the United States but throughout the world (Chung, 1994; Lewy and
. Bathory, 1994; Postlethwaite, 1994). Shane (1981) conducted a survey on the
significant writings fuat influenced currículum in fue fírst three-quarters of fue
twentieth century, and the Handbook was one of four that tied for eighth
through elevenfu place. More recently, a national panel was asked by fue Mu-
seum of Education at fue University of Soufu Carolina to "identify fue educa-
tion books that 'had a significant influence, consequence or resonance' on
American education during fue 20th century" (Kridel, 2000, p. 5). Their list in-
cluded bofu the Handbook and the affective domain taxonomy (Krathwohl,
Bloom, and Masia, 1964) (Kridel, 2000, pp. 72-73). References to and examples
from fue Handbook have appeared in numerous measurement, currículum, and
teacher education textbooks. Its impact nationally and internationally was fue
subject of a National Society for fue Study of Education yearbook (Anderson
and Sosniak, 1994). This book is a revision of fue Handbook.
WHY A REVISION?
Given fue Handbook's longevity and importance, one may reasonably ask Why
would anybody tinker wifu a publication that has such a record? Why is a revi-
sion necessary? We have two reasons. First, fuere is a need to refocus educa-
tors' atlention on the value of the original Handbook, not onIy as a historical
document but also as one that in many respects was "ahead of its time"
(Rohwer and Sloane, 1994). We believe fuat many of the ideas in the Handbook
are valuable to today's educators as they struggle wifu problems associated
1 Throughout this volume, Taxonomy refers to the classification system, and Handbook. refers to fue
publication in which the classification system appears.
XXI
XXII Preface
with the design and implementation of accountability programs, standards-
based currículums, and authentic assessments.
Second, there is a need to incorporate new knowledge and thought into
the framework. Numerous changes in American society since 1956 have in-
fluenced the way we think about and practice education. Now we know
more about how children develop and learn and how teachers plan for, teach,
and assess their students. These increases in knowledge support lhe need for
a revision.
After you have had a cbance to consider our cbanges, you may decide that
we should have left well enough alone. However, we hope you will withhold
final judgment until you have read this book and have attempted to use our
framework to inform your practice.
INTENDED AUDIENCES
We hope to reach several audiences, and teachers are one of the most impor-
tan!. There is ample evidence !hat teachers determine what takes place in lheir
elassrooms through the curriculum lhey actually deliver to lheir students and
the way in which they deliver i!. Consequently, if our revision of lhe Taxonomy
15 to have an Impact on lhe quality of education, it must dramatically influence
the way teachers think and acto Toward this end, we have tried to make this re-
vision much more practical and useful for teachers.
Currículums are currently expected to be standards based (Glatthorn,
1998),. and the majority of states have passed accountability legislation
(Fryrruer, 1996; Gandal, 1996; Rebarber, 1991). Proponents of lhese approaches
seek to Improve substantially the quality of teachers' teaching and students'
learning. 5uch approaches become elassroom realities, however, onIy if lhey
are embraced, understood, and acted upon by classroom teachers.
What can bring about this change? We suggest lhat teachers need a frame-
work to help lhem make sense of objectives and organize lhem so lhat lhey are
clearly understood and fairly easy to implemen!. This framework may help
teachers plan and deliver appropriate instruction, design valid assessment
ta~ks and strategies, and ensure that instruction and assessment are aligned
wllh the obJectives. The aulhors of the original Handbook believed their Taxon-
omy might be such a framework. In our revision, we have sought to (1) revise
and extend their approach, (2) use common language, (3) be consistent wilh
current psychological and educational thinking, and (4) provide realistic exam-
pies of lhe use of lhe framework.
For instance,in both Chapters 1 and 2 we explore the relationship be-
tween standards and objectives. The whole of Section lIT is devoted to demon-
strat~ng th~ applicatio.n of our framework to the classroom. Chapters 8-13
COnsl5t of vIgnettes wntten by teachers describing units lhey have developed
and taught, togelher with our analyses of how our framework might help
teachers understand and ultimately improve the units. Chapter 14 gatbers to-
gether Sorne of lhe wisdom revealed by the vignette analyses for classroom
prachce. Our hope, then, is !hat many teachers will read tbis volume and find
it ofvalue.
Preface XXIII
Teachers are so busy teaching tbat tbey often get tbeir inlormation "second
hand." In this regard, Bloom said lhe original Handbook was "one of lhe most
widely cited yet least read books in American education" (Anderson and 50s-
niak, 1994, p. 9). Therefore, among our audiences we hope to include several
groups lhat interact with and attempt to influence bolh practicing and prospec-
tive teachers. To more efficiently meet the needs of lhese groups, this book
is published in two editions, one an abridged and the other a complete. The
abridged edition includes in its 14 chapters tbe content lhat we believe to be of
greatest interest, value, and immediate practical use to teachers. The complete
edition includes three additional chapters and one additional appendix. One of
lhese chapters describes altemative frameworks for categorizing objectives, one
summarizes empirical studies of tbe structure of tbe original Taxonomy, and a
finalone discusses still unsolved problems (an abridged version appears as the
final section of Chapter 14 of tbe abridged edition). We believe lhe complete
edition will be of greater interest to those persons who are most familiar with
lhe original Handbook, as well as university professors, educational researchers,
and scholars who wish to leam more about this and other frameworks.
Our intended audiences inelude groups of people who influence teachers
both directly and indirectly. Among those who interact with and have a direct
effect on elassroom teachers are teacher educators who plan and deliver pre-
service teacher education programs. For lhem, lhe abridged edition should
provide important adjunct or supplementary reading for their primary text-
books. It follows lhat the authors of the textbooks used in teacher education
courses, as they cite tbe Taxonomy and build upon it, provide another avenue
for bringing tbe framework to teachers' attention. We anticípate that lhese edu-
cators will adapt their current coverage of lhe Taxonomy to the revision.
Curriculum coordinators and educational consultants who are involved in
ongoing professional development activities and help teachers in their class-
rooms also have the potential to influence teachers directly. In designing pro-
grams, they may find it profitable to use our vignettes as case studies of how
tbe framework relates to practice.
Several audiences that indirectly affect teachers may also find this revision of
value. Test designers and test publishers have used tbe Handbook extensively as a
basis for organizing the objectives their achievement tests are intended to measure.
Our revised framework should be at least as usefuI and perhaps even more so.
Although lhe Handbook did not address policy makers (e.g., school boards
and state legislators) and tbe media, these audiences are increasingly impor-
tan!. Our framework can offer policy makers perspectives on where tbe stan-
dards to be met by schools and graduates fall in the panorama of possible goals
and whether their intentions are me!. 5imilarly, tbe framework may enable
joumalists to raise questions about what achievement scores really represento
Our final audience is tbe authors and publishers of tbe textbooks that ele-
mentary and secondary teachers use to teach lheir students. These aulhors
and publishers have the greatest potential for influencíng both teachers and
students if, as many have in lhe past, they incorporate our framework in tbeir
texts and show how il can be used to help teachers analyze their objectives, in-
struction, and assessments and determine tbe alignment of the three.
XXIV Preface
THIS BOOK'S ORGANIZATION
Following this Preface is a Foreword describing the development of both the
original Handbook and our revision. The remainder of the book is divided into
four sections. Section 1 consisls of two chapters. The fusl describes lhe need for
laxonomies and the ways in which educators can use our Taxonomy. The sec-
ond chapler discusses the nature of objectives, their relationship to standards,
and Iheir role in education.
The three chaplers in Seclion II describe Ihe structure of our revised Taxon-
omy. The two-dimensional table known as the Taxonomy Table is presented in
Chapter 3. The next two chapters describe the structure of our revised frame-
work and provide greater detail on the table's two dimensions: Ihe knowledge
dimension (Chapter 4) and the cognitive process dimension (Chapter 5). Each
dimension consists of a set of categories Ihat are defmed and iJlustrated.
The nine chapters in Section III demonstrate Ihe uses and usefulness of the
Taxonomy Table. Chapter 6 describes how Ihe Taxonomy Table can be used to
develop leaming objectives, plan instruction, design assessments, and align
these three activities. Chapter 7 presents an overview of the vignettes, includ-
ing how they can be analyzed and how they may be useful to teachers. Chap-
ters 8-13 contain Ihe vignettes Ihemselves, which are descriptions of actual
course units written by Ihe teachers who developed and/or taught them. Each
vignette is analyzed in terms of its objectives, instruction, assessment, and
alignment using Ihe Taxonomy Table. Finally, Chapter 14 discusses a series of
generalizations derived from our analyses of Ihe vignettes.
Section IV, which is available only in Ihe complete version, examines the
Taxonomy in perspective. In Chapter 15 we compare and contrast 19 altema-
tive frameworks !hat have appeared since the publication of Ihe original Hand-
book; we examine them in Ihe context of the framework and our revision of il.
In Chapter 16 we surnrnarize and review Ihe empirical data !hat bear on Ihe as-
sumed cumulative hierarchy of Ihe original Taxonomy, and we discuss the im-
plication of Ihese data for our revision. Finally, in Chapter 17 we look ahead to
sorne problems that rema in to be solved by authors of future revisions. Both
the abridged and complete editions contain two appendixes: one surnmarizes
the changes the revision made in the original framework, and the other pre-
sents the framework of the original edition. A third appendix, which appears
only in the complete edition, displays the data on which the meta-analysis in
Chapter 16 is based.
AUTHORS
A work of Ihis duration and magnitude required numerous revisions of every
chapter. The vast majority of Ihe chapters retained primary authors through-
out; several chapters had multiple "contributing" aulhors. The chapter aulhors
are Jisted here:
Peter W. Airasian, Boston College-primary author, Chapler 2; contribut-
ing aulhor, Chapler 1; vignette cornmentary, Chapters 10 and 11.
Preface xxv
Lorin W. Anderson, University of South Carolina-primary aulhor, Chap-
ters 1,6, and 14; contributing aulhor, Chapters 3 and 7; vignette com-
mentary, Chapters 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12.
Kathleen A. Cruikshank, Indiana University-contributing aulhor, Chap-
ter 1; vignette cornmenlary, Chaplers 9 and 12.
David R. Kralhwohl, Syracuse University-primary aulhor, Chapters 3,
15, 16, and 17; contributing aulhor, Chapter 6.
Richard E. Mayer, University of California, Santa Barbara-primary au-
Ihor, Chapter 5; contributing aulhor, Chapters 3 and 4.
Paul R. Pintrich, University of Michigan-primary author, Chapter 4; con-
tributing aulhor, Chapters 3 and 5.
James Raths, University of Delaware-contributing aulhor, Chapters 1 and
7; vignette cornmentary, Chapter 13.
Merlin Wittrock, University of California, Berkeley-contributing aulhor,
Chapters 3, 4, and 5.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are especially grateful to these teachers, who wrote Ihe descriptions of Iheir
teaching that are Ihe "heart" of Ihe vignettes in Chapters 8-13:
Chapter 8: Nancy C. Nagengast, Maple Lane Elementary School, Wilming-
ton, Delaware.
Chapter 9: Margaret Jackson, A. C. Flora High School, Columbia, Soulh
Carolina.
Chapter 10: Jeanna Hoffman, Satchel Ford Elementary School, Columbia,
Soulh Carolina.
Chapter 11: Gwendolyn K. Airasian, Wilson Middle School, Natick,
Massachusetts.
Chapter 12: Michael J. Smith, American Geographical Institute, Alexan-
dria, Virginia.2
Chapter 13: Christine Evans, Brandywine (Delaware) School District, and
Deanne McCredie, CapeHenlopen (Delaware) School District.
The aulhors of the vignettes were given Ihe opportunity to see a late draft
of the manuscript and were requested to send cornments to the publisher on
Ihe draft in general and especially on the presentation and analysis of their
own vignette. The authors of Chapter 13, which was added later, also had Ihe
opportunity to review Iheir own vignette as it was presented and analyzed.
The authors' comments and suggestions were used in preparing the final draft.
Copies of this manuscript in several stages of preparation were sent to
various scholars, teachers, and educators. Many of these people retumed
2 Dr. Smith observed the teaching of the unit as part oi a National Science Foundation project. An
experienced teacher taught the unit.
XXVI Preface
l'
cornments that were extremely valuable to the authors in preparing this final
version. We are grateful to al! those who saw early drafts, including: Gwen
Airasian, Wilson Middle School, Natick, MA; Patricia Alexander, University
01 Maryland; James Applefield, University of North Carolina, Wilmington;
Richard Arends, Central Connecticut Sta te; Hilda Borko, University of Col-
orado; Jere Brophy, Michigan state University; Robert Calfee, stanford Univer-
sity; Nathaniel Gage, stanford University; Robert Glaser, University of Pitts-
burgh; Thomas L. Good, University of Arizona; Jeanna Hoffman, satchel Ford
Elementary School, Columbia, SC; Margaret Jackson, A. C. Flora High School,
Columbia, SC; James Johnson, Departrnents of Education and Labor, Washing-
ton, D.C.; Greta Mor;ne-Dershimer, University of Virginia; Nancy Nagengast,
Mapte Lane Elementary Schoot, Wilmington, DE; Melody Shank, Indiana Es-
sential Schools Network; Wayne H. Slater, University of Maryland; Michael
smith, American Geographic Institute, Alexandria, VA; Susan Stodolsky , Uni-
versity of Chicago; and Anitia WoolfoIk, ahio State University.
We are most grateful to Dr. Virginia (Ginny) Blanford, formerly Education
Acquisitions Editor of Addison Wesley Longman, for her strong support of the
project from the beginning to the end. She was instrumental in getting funds
from Longman for the first meeting of the editors and authors. Succeeding
meetings over the years and in-between expenses were funded out of the roy-
alties from the fust edition.
Any revision inevitably treads the same ground as the original edition, and
this book is no exception. We not onIy used ideas expressed in the first edition
without continuously attributing them, which would get annoying, but in
sorne instances used the original phrasing as well. As a group, we have been
ever mindful of the debt we owe those on whose work this new effort has been
based, and we are most grateful that they did the foundation work.
Finally; as editors, we are especial!y indebted to those who !abored with us in
this effort. lt has been a special joy to work with them. We have had many spir-
ited discussions and changed the manuscript so many times it has been hard to
keep track of what went where. But through it al! we've looked forward to our
semiannual meetings and thoroughly enjoyed one another's contributions and
company. One of the eclitors (DRK) especially thanks everyone for holding al! the
meetings in Syracuse when a farnily situation made it clifficult lor him to trave!.
We are extremely sorry that Benjamin Bloom, who originated the idea of
the Taxonomy, edited the original Handbook, and served as mentor lo sorne of
us, developed Alzheimer's disease and could not participate in our revision.
Ben passed away shortly before this book was published. Most who worked on
the original Handbook predeceased this revision's publication; the others are re-
tired. One of the original authors, however, Dr. Edward Furst, supplied us with
sorne useful materials and suggestions. Cornments also carne from Dr. Chris-
tine McGuire, a member of the original group. You'll also note that another
member, Dr. Nathaniel Gage, was one of our helpful reviewers. We hope that
a1l of them will consider this revision the improvement we intend it to be.
Lorin W. Anderson
David R. Krathwohl
Foreword
Although this Taxonomy, indeed the very idea of a taxonomy, may be new to
many of our readers, it is a revision 01 a framework that has been in use for a1-
~ost a half-century. For those unfamiliar with the Handbook, this Foreword pro-
VIdes sorne background on its original development and on the process of this
revision.
In 1948 an informal meeting held in Boston was attended by a group 01 col-
lege and university examiners who believed that a common framework for
dassifying intended student learning outcomes could promote the exchange of
test items, testing procedures, and ideas about testing. As examiners, these in-
dividuals w ere responsible for preparing, administering, scoring, and report"
mg the results of comprehensive examinations for undergraduate courses
taught at their respective institutions.
Since developing good multiple-choice questions is time-consuming, the
exammers hoped to crea te significant labor savings by facilitating the ex-
change of items. They proposed to establish a standard vocabulary for indi-
cating what an item was intended to measure. Such regularized meanings
were to result from a set of carefully defined categories and subcategories into
which any educational objective and, therefore, any test item could be classi-
fied. Initially the framework would be limited to the mainstays of all instruc-
tion, cognitive objectives.
The original group always considered the framework a work in progress,
neither finished no. r final. Indeed, only the cognitive domain was developed
mllially. The affective domain was developed later (Krathwohl, Bloom, and
Masia, 1964), and although both Simpson (1966) and Harrow (1972) provided
frameworks for the psychomotor domain, the original group never did.
Furthermore, there was a great deal of concem among the members of the
original group that the Taxonomy would freeze thought, stifling the develop-
ment of new frameworks. That this did not occur is evident from the large
number of altemative frameworks that have been advanced since the Handbook
was published. A compilation of 19 of these frameworks appears in Chapter 15
of the complete version of this book.
In a memorandum circa 1971 Bloom stated: "Ideally each major field should
have its own taxonomy of objectives in its own language--more detailed, doser
XXVII
XXVIII Foreword
to the speciallanguage and thinkIDg of its experts, reflecting its own appropri-
ate sub-divisions and levels of education, wilh possible new categories, combi-
nations of categories and omitting categories as appropriate." [In his handwrit-
ing, a note refers Ihe reader to Bloom, Hastings, and Madaus (1971), which
showed how Ihe Taxonomy could be so adapted.] There has always been and
remains to this day an expectation Ihat Ihe Taxonomy would be adapted as ed-
ucators in different fields used it, as education changed, and as new knowledge
provided a basis for change. Our revision, Ihen, is bolh overdue and expected.
I
I
1
REVISION OF THE HANDBOOK
The idea of revising Ihe Taxonomy and Ihe entire Handbook began wilh a series
of discussions between David Krathwoh1, one of the aulhors of the original
Handbook, and Dr. Virginia Blanford, Senior Education Editor of Addison Wes-
ley Longman, Inc. Since Longman owned Ihe rights to the original Handbook,
Dr. Blanford was aware of Ihe need for a revision and was interested in mar-
keting it. A group met to discuss revision and laid sorne plans, but little
progress was made until Ihe publication of Bloom's Taxonomy: A Forty-Year Ret-
rospective (Anderson and Sosniak, 1994). Following its publication, David
Kralhwoh1 and Lorin Anderson began planning for an inilial meeting of a new
group of interested parties to discuss the desirability and feasibility of revising
Ihe Taxonomy and Ihe Handbook.
As the plans for the meeting progressed, attention turned to who should
participate. A decision was made to choose representatives of three groups:
cognitive psychologists, curriculum theorists and instructional researchers,
and testing and assessment specialists. An initial meeting, held in Syracuse,
New York, in November 1995, was attended by these eight people (arranged
by group):
Cognitive psyehologists: Richard Mayer, Paul Pintrich, and William Rohwer.
Merlin Wittrock was invited but could not attend.
Currículum theorists and instruetional researehers: Lorin Anderson and Kath-
leen Cruikshank. Jean Clandinin, Michael Connelly; and James Raths were
invited but could not attend. Clandinin and Connelly later wilhdrew from
Ihe Project.
Testing and assessment speeialists: Peter Airasian, Linda Crocker, and David
Kralhwoh1.
The meeting resulted in a draft table of contents for Ihe revision and writ-
ing assignrnents. Like the original Handbook, Ihe revision was a group effort.
Drafts of various documents were prepared during Ihe remainder of 1996 and
first distributed to all group members in late 1996 and early 1997. The group
Ihen met twice yearly in Ihe spring and fan to review drafts; discuss strengths,
weaknesses, omissions, and redundancies; and determine appropriate next
steps. A draft of Ihe framework was presented for public comment at a syrnpo-
sium at Ihe American Educational Research Association in April1998; it was
Foreword XXIX
generally well received. The reaction suggested Ihe revision might be ready for
more detailed review.
At a lune 1998 meeting in Syracuse, plans were laid to prepare a draft for
external review. Addison Wesley Longman was generous in lining up a large
number of blind reviews, and a draft manuscript was distributed in November
1998. Based on the reviews, revisions were made during Ihe summer of 1999. A
revised draft manuscript was Ihe focus of discussion at a final Syracuse meet-
ing held in October 1999.
The revision during the summer of 1999 removed many references to the
original Handbook Ihat we had included not only because we gratefully give
credil to Ihe original group but also because we wished, at appropriate points,
to show how our revision builds on Ihe original framework. However, the re-
viewers reminded us Ihat many of our readers would be totally unfamiliar
wilh Ihe original Handbook. Consequently, such references would Jikely convey
little meaning, get in the way, and unduly complicate the text. Therefore, for
Ihe most par!, this volume has been written as Ihough the reader were coming
to Ihe topie fresh.
Sorne readers will nevertheless be curious to know how Ihe revision differs
from Ihe original, especially Ihose who are familiar wilh Ihe original and have
used it. For these readers, we have surnmarized in Appendix A 12 of Ihe major
changes that we made. In addition, we have included a condensed version of
Ihe original Taxonomy in Appendix B. We hope Ihat we have conveyed the
tremendous debt we owe Ihe framers of the original Taxonomy.
SECTION I
The Taxonomy:
Educational Objectives
and Student Learning
I
&1
I
I
I!
1
¡
/ 1
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In Iife, objeetives help us to focus our attention and our efforts; they indieate
what we want to accomplish. In education, objeetives indicate what we want
students to leam; they are "explicit formulations of the ways in which stu-
,
dents are expected to be changed by the educative process" (Handbook, 1956,
p. 26). Objectives are espeeially important in teaching because teaching is an
intentional and reasoned act. Teaching is intentional beeause we always teach
for some purpose, primarily to facHitate student learning. Teaching is rea-
soned because what teachers teach their students is judged by them to be
worthwhiJe.
The reasoned aspect of teaching relates to what objectives teachers select for
their students. The intentional aspect of teaching concems how teachers help
students achieve the teachers' objectives, that is, the learning environments the
teachers ereate and the activities and experiences they provide. The learning
environments, activities, and experiences should be aligned with, or be consis-
tent with, the selected objectives.
Teachers' objectives may be explicit or implicit, clearly or fuzzily con-
ceived, easily measurable or noto They may be caHed something other than
objectives. In the past they were caHed aims, purposes, goals, and guiding
outcomes (Bobbitt, 1918; Rugg, 1926a and b). Today they are more Iikely
to be referred to as content standards or curriculum standards (KendaH and
Marzano, 1996; Glatthom, 1998). Regardless of how they are stated and what
they are caHed, objectives are present in virtuaHy aH teaching. Stated simply,
when we teach, we want our students to leam. What we want them to leam as
a result of our teaching are our objectives.'
THE NEED FOR A TAXONOMY
Consider a recent lament from a middle school teacher: "When 1 first heard
about the possibHity of statewide standards, 1 was intrigued. 1 thought that it
t Throughout this volume we use the term ob jectives to refer to intended student learning
outcomes. Thus, objectives, curriculum standards, and learning goaIs aH refer to ¡ntended student
leaming.
3
4 Section 1 The Taxonomy: Educational Objectives and Student Leaming
might be nice lo have a e1ear idea of what students were expected to kn d
be able to do in each subject at each grade level. But when 1 saw the ;;;t::f
the standards, 1 was appalled. There were so many. There were 85 standards in
slxfu-grade English language arts (my specialty area); fuere were more than
100 m slxth-grade mathematics. And they were so vague. 1 remember one in
parttcular. 'Describe connections between historical and cultural influences
and literacy seledions.' What connections? Whal influences? What selections?
And what do they mean by describe? 1 asked myself, 'How can these things
posslbly help me teach better and my students leam better?'"
What can teachers do when confronted wifu what fuey believe to be an ex-
ce,:d~gly large number of vague objedives? To deal with the vast number of
ob)ectives, fuey need to organize them in sorne way. To deal wifu the problem
of vagueness, they need to make the objectives more precise. In a nutshell
fuen, thes,: teamers need an organizing framework that increases precisio~
and, most tmportant, promotes understanding.
. . Ho~ can a framework help teamers make sense of such statements of ob-
Jectives . A framework CO~s1Sts of a set of categories related to a single phenom-
en~n (e.~., mmerals, flction). The categories are a collection of "bins" into
wh,m ob)ects, experiences, and ideas can be placed. Objects, experiences, and
ld~as that share cornmon maracteristics are placed in the same "bin." The cri-
tena t~at.are relev~nt .in fue sorting process are determined by a set of organiz-
mg pnnapl~pnnC1ples that are used to differentiate among the categories.
<?nce classifled, the characteristics of each category as well as the characteris-
tics of. the othe~ categories in the framework help teamers lo better understand
what IS placed m the category.
. Consider the phylogenelic framework (with categories of mammals,
btrds, arthropods, and so on). The organizing principies (or "sorting criteria")
mclude body maracteristics (e.g., presence and / or location of skeleton, warrn-
blooded vs. cold-blooded) and birth and care of young (e.g., eggs vs. live
birth; absent vs. nurturing). To use fue framework lo enhance our understand-
mg, we leam the defining features of each category. For example, what in",kes
a mammal a ma~l? We learn ~at mammals are air-breathing, are warm-
blooded, nurse thelr young, provlde more protection and training of their
young than do other animals, and have a larger, more well-developed brain
than do other arumals. If we hear thal a hyrax is a mammal, then we under-
sland somethmg about the hyrax by virtue of its placemenl in the framework.
If we are then lold that a giraffe is a mammal, we know that hyraxes and gi-
raffes share sorne cornmon characteristics because they are placed in the same
category of the framework.
. A taxonomy is a special kind of framework. In a taxonomy fue calegories
lie along a continuum. The continuum (e.g., the wave frequencies underlying
color, the alormc strudure underlying fue periodic table of fue elemenls) be-
comes one of the major organizing principies of fue framework. In our Taxon-
omy we are classifying objectives. A slatement of an objective contains a verb
and a noun. The verb generally describes the intended cognitive pracess. The
Chapter 1 lntroduction 5
noun generally describes the knowledge students are expected to acquire .or
constructo Consider the following example: "The student wllllearn to dlstin-
guish (the cognitive process) among confederal, federal, and unitary systems
of government (the knowledge)."
In contrast with the single dirnension of the original Taxonomy, the re-
vised framework is two-dimensional. As suggested in the preceding para-
graph, the two dimensions are cognitive process and kno.wledge. We refer to
their interrelationships as the Taxonomy Table (see the tnSlde front cover). The
cognitive process dimension (i.e., the columns of the table) contains six cale-
tin
gories: Remember, Understand, Apply, Analyze, Evaluate, and Create. The cox:
-
uum underlying fue cognitive process dimension is assumed lo be cognlttve
complexity; that is, Understand is believed to be more cognitively complex
than Remember, Apply is believed to be more cognitively complex than Under-
stand, and so on.
The knowledge dimension (i.e., the rowS of the table) contains four cale-
gories: Factual, Conceptual, Procedural, and Metacognitive. These calegones are
assumed to lie along a conlinuum from concrete (Factual) lo abstract (Metacog-
nitive). The Conceptual and Procedural calegories overlap in terms of abstract-
ness, with sorne procedural knowledge being more concrete than the most ab-
stract conceptual knowledge.
To begin lo see how the Taxonomy Table helps us understand objectives,
consider the aforementioned objective regarding systems of govemment. The
verb-" distinguish" -provides clues to the desired cognitive process. As will
be seen in Chapter 5, "distinguish" is associated wifu the cognitive process cat-
egory Analyze. The noun phrase-" confederal, federal, and urutary systems of
govemment" -gives clues lo the desired type of knowledge. As Wlll be seen m
Chapter 4, "systems" signify Conceptual knowledge. In terms of the Taxonomy
Table, then, the objective involves Analyze and Conceptual knawledge. .
Consider a second example, lhis one from mafuematics: "The student wlll
leam to differentiate between rational numbers and irrational numbers." Dif-
ferentiating, like distinguishing, is a subcategory in the process categ~ry Ana-
lyze. The nouns, rational and irrational numbers, are numencal categones. Cat-
egories are concepls, and concepts líe at fue hea.rt of Conceptual knowledge. In
terms of tlie Taxonomy Table, this second ob¡ective also tnvolves Analyze and
Conceptual knowledge. . .
In the Taxonorny Table, both objectives are placed tn lhe cell where the raw
labeled Conceptual knowledge inlersects the column labeled Analyze. Desp~te
Iheir different subject malter, then, fuese two objectives about soctal studies
and mathematics are classified in the same cell of the Taxonomy Table. Both are
grounded in Conceptual knowledge; both require students to engage in the
process Analyze. Once we understand the meaning of Conceptuallcnowledge. and
the meaning of Analyze, we know a greal deal about both of these ob¡ecllves.
Just as placing an animal inlo the phylogenetic framework h~lps uS better un-
dersland the animal, placing an objective into our framework mcreases our un-
derstanding of that objective.
6 Section 1 The Taxonorny: Educational Objectives and Studenl Leaming
USING OUR INCREASED UNDERSTANDING
Allhough we may gain a belter understanding of an objective using lhe Taxon-
omy Table, how does this increased understanding help us? Teachers tradition-
ally have struggled wilh issues and eoneems pertaining to edueation, teaching,
and leaming. Here are four of lhe most important organizing questions:
1. What is important for students to learn in lhe limited school and class-
room time available? (lhe learning question)
2. How does one plan and deliver inslruction that wiIl result in high levels of
leaming for large nurnbers of students? (lhe inslruction question)
3. How does one select or design assessment inslrurnents and proeedures
lhat provide accurate information about how well students are learning?
(lhe assessment question)
4. How does one ensure !hat objectives, instruction, and assessment are con-
sistent wilh one another? (lhe alignment question)
These four organizing questions reappear throughout the book and pro-
vide a basis for showing how lhe Taxonomy framework can be used . We de-
scribe lhem in greater delail in the nexl four sections of this chapler.
THE TAXONOMY TABLE, OB.JECTIVES, AND INSTRUCTIONAL TIME
One of lhe mosl common and long-standing curriculurn questions is What is
worlh learning? This is the first of lhe organizing questions. At an abstract
leve!, lhe answer defines whal it means to be an educated persono Al a more
concrete level, Ihe answer defines lhe meaning of lhe subject malter being
taught. ls mathematics, for example, a discrete body of knowledge lo be mem-
orized or an organized, coherent, conceptual system to be underslood? Does
rea~g consist of remembering a set of sound-symbol relationships or gaining
mearung from lhe words on a printed page? Similar questions can be asked of
science, history, art, music, and olher fields.
TOOays emphasis on state-level standards is inlended to provide at least a
partial answer to lhe leaming question. But as our middle school teacher's
cornments' suggest, simply having standards does not necessarily provide a
sound, defensible answer. "Grocery lists" of standards may be more confusing
and frustrating lhan enlightening and useful. Teachers must still answer the
question What is worth leaming? They answer it, in large part, by the way lhey
allocate time in the c1assroom and by lhe emphasis they convey to lheir stu-
dents about what is really important.
Over lhe past century, the number of possible answers to lhis fundamental
curriculum question has increased as our collective knowledge and lhe amount
~f information available to us have increased. We continue to operate educa-
tionally, however, withln virtually lhe same lenglh of school year !hat we used
a hundred years ago. If lhe difficult decisions are not made about what is worlh
learning, lhen teachers are likely to simply run out of time. When teachers op-
Chapler 1 lntroduction 7
erate within a textbook-based curriculum, for example, lhey complete as many
ehapters as time permits.
Looking lhrough the lens of the Taxonomy Table, teachers can see more
c1early lhe array of possible objectives as well as lhe nelationships among lhem.
Thus, when we analyze all or part of a curriculum in terms of Ihe Taxonomy
Table, we can gain a more complete underslanding of the curriculum. Rows,
columns, and cells lhat have numerous entries become evident, as do lhose lhal
have no entries at al!. An entire row or eolumn !hat has no entries can alert us to
lhe possibility of including objectives lhat heretofone had not been eonsidened.
In sum, the Taxonomy framework obviously can't directly lell teachers
what is worth leaming. Bul by helping teachers lranslate standards into a com-
mon language for comparison wilh what lhey personally hope to achleve, and
by presenting lhe variety of possibilities for consideration, the Taxonomy may
provide sorne perspective to guide curriculum decisions.
THE TAXONOMY TABLE AND INSTRUCTION
Once an objective has been placed into a particular eell of lhe Taxonomy T~ble,
we can begin systematieally lo altack Ihe problem of helpmg students achleve
lhat objective. Thus, the seeond organizing question involves mstruetion. We
have used two objectives as examples:
• The slUdent willleam to distinguish among confederal, federal, and uni-
tary systems of government.
• The slUdent willlearn to differentiate between rational numbers and irra-
tional numbers.
We plaeed bolh of these objectives in the eell that corresponds to lhe intersec-
tion of Analyze and Conceptual knowledge; that is, bolh are of the form analyze
conceptual knowledge. How does this placement help us plan our instruction?
Categories and c1assifications form lhe basis of Conceptual knowledge. Thus,
inslruction nelated to these objectives must help students form lhe categones
and cIassifications inhenent in Ihe objective: eonfederal, federal, and unitary
systems of government, on lhe one hand, and rational and irrational numbers,
on lhe other. From a variety of nesearch studies we know lhat examples help
students forrn eategories and classifieations (Tennyson, 1995). Thus, examples
should be incorporated into instructional plans for objectives lhal involve Con-
ceptual knowledge. .. .. .
Looking back at lhe Iwo objectives, we see that dlslmgulshing ando dlffer-
entiating are bolh eognitive processes associated wilh Analyze .. In faet, differe~tiating
involves distinguishing lhe parts of a whole slrueture m terms of lhelr
relevance or importance. In the first objective the whole struclUre is "systems
of government." The parts are confedera!, federal, and unitary, a.nd lhey differ
in many respects. The question is What are lhe most relevant or Importan~ dif-
ferenees? Similarly, in the second objective lhe whole structure IS lh~ real
number system." The parts are rational and irrational numbers. Agam, the
I
8 Section r The Taxonorny: Educational Objectives and Student Learning
~uesti~~ is What are Ihe most relevant or important differences among Ihe
parts m the context of Ihe "whole"?
. Regardless of the specific objective, Ihen, when instruction is directed at
~bJechves c1assified as Analyze Conceptual knowledge, one might expect activi-
ties Ihat:
• focus students' attention on categories and c1assifications;
• use exa?,ples and nonexamples to help students form fue proper
categones;
• help students see specific categories in relation to a larger dassification
system; and
• e~phasize Ihe relevant and important differences among Ihe categories
Wlthin the context of the larger system. (Tennyson, 1995)
. Now consider a third objective: "Students willleam the names of Ihe ma-
Jor work~, ~f Amencan and British novelists." In our framework, "Ieam Ihe
names~f mdlcates Remember, and "names of the major works of American
and Bnhsh novelists" suggests Factual knowledge. Thus, Ihis objective is of Ihe
form remember fact~al knowledge. Instruc~on designed for this objective is dif-
ferent.from mstruction deslgned for fue first two objectives. Instructional plans
for obJectives dasslÍled as Remember Factual knowledge might lead one to expect
fue teacher to:
• periodically remind students of the specific details to be remembered (e g
names, not plot or characters); .. ,
• giv~ students strategies (e.g., rehearsal) and tedmiques (e.g., mnemonic
deVlces) for helpmg them memorize Ihe relevant knowledge; and
• p:ovide opportunities for students to practice fuese strategies and tech-
ruques. (Pressley and Van Meter, 1995)
· Two points should be made here. First, different types of objectives require
different mstruchona! approaches, Ihat is, different learning activities, different
curncular mat~nals, and different teacher and student roles. Second, similar
types of obJechv:s-~egardless of differences in Ihe topic or subject matter-
may reqmre slm¡Ja~ mstru~tional approaches Goyce and Weil, 1996). Given
particular kmds of mstructional goals, Romizowski (1981), for example, lists
a. varlety of mstructional charactenstics that facilitate their achlevement. Clas-
slfymg a. parhcular objective wifuin our hamework, then, helps teachers
sy~tematically plan a way of effectively facilitating students' learning of Ihat
obJective.
THE TAXONOMY TABLE AND ASSESSMENT
Th~ two points made in Ihe preceding paragraph apply to assessment as well
which brmgs us to the third organizing question. Different types of objective~
(fuat IS, obJective.s in different cells of the table) require different approaches to
assessment. Sumlar types of objeclives (that is, objectives in the same cells of
Chapter 1 Introduction 9
Ihe table) likely involve similar approaehes to assessment. To illustrate Ihese
points, we continue wilh our three sample objectives .
To assess studenls' learning with respee! lo fue systems of government ob-
jective, we could provide eaeh student with a description of the system of gov-
ernment of an imaginary country and ask Ihe student to answer questions
about the government. An imaginary country is used to ensure fuat Ihe student
has not encountered it in Ihe past and Ihus cannol answer the questions based
on memory alone. Three example questions follow:
• What system of government is this (federal, confederal, or unitary)?
• How do you know fuat it is the type of government system you say it is?
• What changes would need to be rnade to transform fue country's system
into Ihe olher two systems? That is, if it is a federal system, what ehanges
would make it a confederal system or a unitary system?
To assess students' learning wilh respect to fue number systems objective,
we could provide eaeh student with a Iist of, say, six numbers, all of whieh are
eilher ralional or irrational numbers, and ask the student to answer questions
about the Iist of numbers. The numbers selected should be as different as pos-
sible hom the numbers in Ihe textbook or discussed during class. Three exam-
pIe questions follow:
• To what number system, raliona! or irrational, do a1l of fuese numbers
belong?
• How do you know Ihat it is Ihe type of number system you say it is?
• How could you change eam number so it is an example of fue ofuer num-
ber system? That is, if it is an irrational num.ber, change it to a rational
number, and if it is a rationa! number, change ilto an irrational number.
Note the parallelism in Ihese two sets of questions. 80th begin with an ex-
ample or a set of examples in one of fue categories. In bofu cases, the example
or set of examples is different from examples included in fue text or mentioned
in c1ass. This condition is needed to ensure lhat understanding, rather Ihan re-
membering, is being assessed. The three questions are essentially the same: To
what category does Ihe example or examples belong? How do you know lhat?
How can you change the example or examples so Ihey belong to fue other cate-
gory or categories? This blueprint, fuen, can be used for designing assessments
for many objectives of fue form analyze conceptual knowledge.
The third sample objective was to learn the names of the major works of
American and British novelists. Here, we want aH of Ihe works and novelists
induded in Ihe assessment instrument to be fuose contained in the text or dis-
cussed in dass. The emphasis is on remembering, not understanding. A fre-
quently used assessment format for such objectives is matching. The names of
Ihe novels are listed in, say, column A, and the names of Ihe American and
British novelists are Iisted in column B. Students are asked to locate the novel-
ist in column B who wrote eam of fue novels in column A. Notice Ihat this for-
mat is appropriate for many objectives of the form remember factual knowledge.
¡ ¡
10 Section 1 The Taxonomy: EducationaI Objectives and Studenl Leaming
THE CONCEPT OF ALIGNMENT
Alignment refers to the degree of correspondence among the objectives, instruc-
tion, and assessmenl; il is the topie of !he fourlh and last organizing question.
In the syslems of govemmenl example, Ihe objective is of the form analyze con-
ceptual krwwledge. lnstruction Ihat focuses students' attention on the three spe-
cilic categories, !hal uses examples to help sludenls form the proper calegories,
thal helps studenls see !he Ihree spedfic categories in relation to a larger sys-
lem, and thal emphasizes Ihe relevanl and importanl differences among Ihe
calegories within the larger system is well aligned with the objective. Sirnilarly,
assessment lasks that provide sludenls with information about an unfarniliar
govemmenl and ask them to classify Ihe govemmenl inlo one of Ihe three
types, defend the classification made, and describe Ihe changes necessary lo
modify the govemmenl into !he other Iwo Iypes are well aligned with Ihe
objective.
Severe misalignrnenl can cause problems. If, for example, instruction is not
a1igned with assessments, then even high-quality instruction will nol likely in-
fluence sludent performance on Ihose assessments. Sirnilarly , if assessments
are not aligned wi!h objectives, then the results of the assessments will nol re-
flecl achievemenl of those objecti ves.
Typically, Ihe degree of alignrnent is determined by comparing objectives
wilh assessmenl, objectives wilh instruction, and instruction with assessmenl.
This comparison often resulls in a surface-Ievel analysis, however. The Taxon-
omy Table offers an imporlanl allemative lo facilitale comparisons. The table is
a kind of louchstone; its earefully defined terros and organization provide pre-
eision across all Ihree eomparisons. Thus, a special Taxonomy Table can be pre-
pared using different notations for objectives, for inslruction, and for assess-
menls as eaeh is classified in Ihe cells of the table. By delermining whether
nolations for aH three-<>bjectives, instructional activities, and assessments-
appear together in !he individual ceHs of the table (strong alignrnent), or sorne
cells eonlain only two of them (weaker alignment), or many cells conlain only
one of them (weakest alignrnent), we gain a deeper-Ieve1 examination of a1ign-
menl. The examination emphasizes consistency in lerms of intended student
leaming. This approaeh is ilIustrated in the vignettes in Chaplers 8-13 of this
volume.
TEACHERS AS CURRICULUM MAKERS VERSUS TEACHERS AS
CURRICULUM IMPLEMENTERS: A CLOSING COMMENT
In the span of a hundred years, much of Ihe control over whal is
laughl has shifted from the sehoolhouse to the slatehouse--an often
lurbulent transition made reluctantly and grudgingly. Slate leaders,
more than ever, are at the helm, still trying lo fulfill the hope and
promise for public edueation Iheir eounlerparts were striving for a
century ago. (Manzo, 1999, p. 21)
Chapler 1 Introduction t t
lt should be clear from the introduction to this chapter Ihat we expect
our work to be used in the contexl of "teachers as curriculum implementers";
that is, teachers are given sets of objectives (e.g., in textbooks or increasingly
slate- or districl-mandated standard s) and are expected to deliver mstruction
that enables a large proportion of sludents to achieve those standards. The Tax-
onomy Table should help teachers do fuis a~d do it reasonably well. .
At the same time, however, we recogmze that sorne curnculum theoTlsts,
teacher educalors, and teachers themselves believe teachers should be "cur-
riculum rnakers" (see, for example, Clandinin and Connelly, 1992). Is our
framework useful in fuis context as well? We believe it is. For these teachers,
however, the framework is more likely to function as a heunstic than as a
guide. For instance, the Taxonomy may suggest the range and tYf'es of cogru-
tive objectives lO considero A1l further evidence for the framework s usefulnes~,
we recommend examining the analyses of the V1gnettes to see how they faciJ¡-
tate curriculum developmenl. These vignettes were prepared by teachers func-
tioning as curriculum makers. Sorne of the te~chers were qUlle free to deslgn
their units as they saw fil. Others were constramed lo a greater or lesser degree
by legislative regulations, slate standards, district guidelin~s, lextbook adop-
ti and the like. Regardlessof the degree of freedom avadable lo the teach-
ons, d din f th . I ching
ers, our framework provided us with a level of un erslan . g o. elf. ea
practices that was hitherto not evidenl. Strengths and areas m need of nnprove-
ment were both apparenl.
lt is our hope Ihat, whether the curriculum was given lo the teachers or de-
. ed by them this revision of the Taxonomy will help teachers make sense of
Slgn , h l' ed 'th
the curriculum, plan inSlruction, and design assessments ~ at are a l~ Wl
the objectives inherent in the curriculum and l.11timately nnprove theu teach-
ing quality. Furthermore, our framework should ~rovide a com~on way of
thinking about and a common vocabulary for talking aboul leaching thal en-
hances communication among leachers themselves and among leachers,
leacher educators, curriculum coordinators, assessmenl specialisls, and school
administralors.
CHAPTER 2
The Structure, Specificity,
and Problems olObjectives
Given the import",Ilce of objectives in education, in this chapter we address the
st~ucture, speafiClty, and criticisms of objectives. We recognize that objectives
eXIst In. many forms¡rangmg from highly specific to global and from explicit
to lffipliClt. We also recognize that Ihere is debate over Ihe merits and liabilities
of objectiv,:s in Iheir varied forms. We concentrate mainly on Ihose objectives
Ihat we believe are most useful for identifying Ihe intended cognitive outcomes
of schooling, for gUldmg the selection of effective instructional activities and
for selecting or designing appropriate assessments. We understand that ~lher
types and forms of objectives may be useful in different ways.
THE STRUCTURE OF OB.JECTIVES
The most commonly used model of educational objectives is based on the work
of ~Iph Tyler (1949). Tyler :uggested Ihat "the most useful form for stating ob-
jectives IS to express Ihem In terms which identify bolh the kind of behavior to
be d~~eloped in Ihe s~dent and Ihe content ... in whlch this behavior is to op-
er~te . (p. 30) (emphaslS ours). In Chapter 1 we indicated Ihat a statement of an
obJective contams a verb and a noun. We went on to say Ihat Ihe verb generalIy
describes the intended cognitive process, and the noun generally describes Ihe
knowledge students are expected to acquire or construc!. In our formulation
Ihen, we used "cognitive process" in place of "behavior" and "knowledge" i~
place of "conten!." Because Ihese substitutions were intentional, let us consider
Ihem m greater detail.
CONTENT VERSUS KNOWLEDGE
In the educationalliterature, content is often discussed but rarely defined. We
read of content domams and disciplinary content (Doyle, 1992), content knowl-
edge and pedagogical content knowledge (Shulman, 1987). The Merriam-
Webster Dlchonary (online at www.m-w.com/home) contains several definitions of
contento The one most pertinent to our disc. ussion is "matter dealtwilh in a field
of sh!dy." Thls definition suggesjs. that.~ontent,¡s eqÚÍva]ent to what has tradi-
tlOnqlIy been referred to as "s_ubject iñattéi'l (that is, a cü;:;tent domak).'
12
Chapter 2 The Structure, Specificity, and Problems of Objectives 13
The dictionary lists as a synonym, "substance." When applied to a particular
subject matter, then, content is its substance.
Who determines the substance of a given subject matter? Traditioruilly; this
task has fallen to scholars who have spent their lives studying and working in
a field: mathematicians, scientists, historian s, and the like. Over time they
reach a consensus on what might be termed the "historically shared knowl-
edge" that defines the subject matter of their academic discipline. This "histori-
cally shared knowledge" is not sta tic; changes are made as new ideas and evi-
dence are accepted by the scholarly community. In this context, then, conten! is
"historically shared knowledge." Accordingly, we use the term knowledge to re-
'flecfour belief thaídisciplines are constantly changing and evolving in terms
ofthe knowledge that shares a consensus ohcceptance within the di~pline.
"Knowledge" and "subject matter content" are aIso related in another way,
however. Confusion often arises between subject matter as the knowledge in
an academic discipline and subject malter as the materials used to convey the
knowJedge to students. For educational purposes, subject malter content must
be "packaged" in sorne way. Examples of packaging inelude textbooks, grade
leveJs, courses, and, increasingly, multimedia "packages." Packaging involves
selecting and organizing content so it can be presented in "forms that are peda-
gogically powerful and yet adaptive to the variations in ability and back-
ground presented by the students" (Shulman, 1987, p. 15). This confusion
between subject malter as the content of a discipline and "packaged subject
matter" designed to promote learning is largely eliminated by referring to the
former as knowledge and the lalter as curricular materials, instructional mate-
rials, or simply materials.
In summary, then, we have two reasons for substituting "knowledge" for
"content." The first is to emphasize the fact that subject malter content is "his-
toricalJy shared knowledge" that isarrived at thr6ugh a currently shared con~
S;;':;sus within a disCipline and is subject to change over time. The second rea-
'süI;¡"s 'to ififferentiate the subject matter content of an academic discipline from
the materiaíS in which the content is embedded.
BEHAVIOR VERSUS COGNITIVE PROCESSES
In retrospect, Tyler's choice oI the word behavior was unlortunate for at least
two reasons. First, beca use behaviorism was the predominant theory of psy-
chology at the time, many people incorrectly equated Tyler's use of the term
behavior with behaviorism. From Tyler's perspective, a change in behavior was
the intended result of instruction. Specifying student behavior was intended to
make general and abstract learning goaIs more specific and concrete, thus en-
abling teachers to guide instruction and provide evidence of leaming. If the
teacher could describe the behavior to be altained, it could be recognized eas-
ily when Jearning occurred.
Behaviorism, in contrast, was a means by which desired ends could be
achieved. PrincipIes of instruction, within the context of behaviorism, included
14 Section 1 The Taxonomy: Educational Objectives and Student Leaming
instrumental conditioning and lhe formation of stimulus-response associa-
tions. It was not surprising lhen lhal critics who confused behaviors wilh be-
haviorism suggested !hal Tyler's objectives were oriented mainly loward
teaching through manipulation and control.
Second, aided by lhe popularity of management-by-objectives, task analy-
sis, and programmed inslruclion in the 1950s and 1960s, behavior became
an adjective modifying objeclives. The level of specificily and detail of lhese
new "behavioral objectives" wenl well beyond Tyler's original concept of
objectives lo include lhe conditions under which sludenls were lo demonstrale
lheir learning and the slandards of performance Ihat would indica le Ihat
successfullearning had taken place. Consider this typical behavioral objective
of lhe 1950s and 1960s: "Given a map or charl, the sludent will correctly
define six of lhe eight representational devices and symbols on it." The bold
print indica les Ihe condilions; Ihe italicized malerial indicales Ihe standard
of performance. It is underslandable Ihal crilics who equated Tyler's more
generally staled objectives wilh behavioral objectives saw lhem as narrow and
inadequale.
In part lO eliminate confusion, we have replaced "behavior" wilh lhe lerm
"cognitive process." This ehange reflects lhe facl lhal eognitive psychology and
cognitive science have beeome Ihe dominanl perspectives in psyehology and
educalion. We can make belter sense of lhe verbs in objeclives by using the
knowledge gained from eognilive research. To ilIustrale this point, consider the
following sel of verbs: list, write, state, classiJy, explain, and attribute.
The firsl three verbs-list, write, and sta te-are slaples of traditional be-
havioral objeclives (e.g., "The sludenls will be able to list Ihree reasons for
lhe rise of cornmunism in Eastem Europe"). However, Ihese verbs are vague
in terms of their underlying cognitive processes. How, for example, did lhe
studenls arrive at their lisis? Did lhey remember a Iist provided by lhe
leacher or encounlered in a lexlbook? Or, did Ihey analyze malerial eonlained
in several books lo develop lheir lisIs? In lhis case, a single verb-list-can be
associated with two very different Taxonomy calegories-Remember and
Ana/yze.
In conlrast, Ihe second set of tbree verbs-classiJy, exp/ain, and attribute-
have specific meanings wilhin our framework. ClassiJy means lo delermine
whelher something belongs lo a particular calegory. Exp/ain means lo construct
a cause-and-effecl model of a syslem. Attribute means lo delermine lhe poinl of
view, bias, values, or intenl underlying presenled material. This increased
specificity helps uso focus on what we want sludenls lo leam (e.g., "classify")
ralher Ihan on how we expect lhem lo demonstrale lhe;r learning (e.g., "lisl").
Our use of lhe lerm "cognilive proeess" in place of "behavior" lhus not only
eliminales Ihe eonfusion wilh behaviorism bul also refleets our efíorl lo in-
corporale cognitive psychological research findings into our revision of the
framework.
Accordingly Ihe two main dirnensions of lhe Taxonomy Table are lhe four
lypes of knowledge and lhe six major cognitive process ealegories.
I
I
I
Chapler 2 The Structure, Specificity, and Problems of Objectives 115
SPECIFICITY OF OS.lECTIVES
The general domain of objectives is besl represenled as a conlinuum ranging
from quile general lo very specific. Along lhls contmuum, Kralhwohl and
Pa e (1971) idenlified Ihree levels of specificily called global, educallOnal, and
:rructional guidance objeetives, wilh lhe lalter now more eommonly referred
lo as inslruetional objectives. As we discuss Ihese tbree levels, you should bear
in mind lhal lhey represenl lhree positions on a conlrouum of speClficlly, so
Ihal classifying any objeelive involves a judgmenl aboul lhe level ro which 11
bes! fits.
GLOBAL OBJECTIVES
Global objectives areco!!'plex, multifa~eled leaming oulcomes Ihal re~1,1:
subsfaritia.1 time and instruetion lo aeeomplish. They are.broad.ly slaled an
f
l
compás:sáláIge.n)lll1.ber ofmore specific objec!ives,Here are lhree examp es o
global objectives:
o AII sludents wilI slar! school ready lolearn.
o AlI studenls willleave Grades 4, 8, and 12 having demonstraled compe-
tency over ehallenging subjecl malter.
o AII sludenls willleam lo use Iheir mind well, so lhey will be prepared for
responsible citizenship, further leaming, and productive employmenl ro
Qur nation' s economy.
These global objeclives are taken from Goa/s 2000, a sel of goals for U.5 9 :)duca-
tion to be achieved by Ihe Jear 2000 (U.S. Departmenl of Educal1O~, ).9 .
The function o(gl<;lbal)objectives,. orgoals,is to provlde a vIslOn'of fue fu d
d . Ü"ing cry for policy makers, curriculum deyelopers, leachers, an
ture an ara y. . . . .. b d b h whal is deemed
fur --- b1" e al large. The goals rodlcale ro a roa - rus way .
re~~~nl ~n a good edueation. Thus, a gl2ba1 ()-"'jective is "something pris~nt1y
out of reach; it is something lo strive (or, lo I.n.0. "e 10ward,Q!.l0 beeome¡ lIs an
airn or'ptirpose so stated thal it exciles lhe irnaginalion and glVes peop e some-
lhing lhey wanÚo work f<;JI" (Kappel, 1960, p. 38).
EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES
For leaehers lo use global objectiv~s in lheir planning ~nd leaehing, lhe objee~
tives musl be broken'OoWn ¡rito a more focused, delimiled form: Th~ v~ry g~
' .. li f lobal objectives lhal is necessary lo "exeile lhe l.O\agmaQ<;l1) . ma es
~~:mtydiffi~uit lo use lo plan cIassroom aClivities,define sUllable assessmenl
proeedures, and evaluate sludent performanees ro a meanmgful w~y. More
ific objectives are necessary for lhose tasks. .
spec On f lhe main aims oí lhe original Handbook was lo focus altention on
Objeeli:e~ somewhal more specifie fuan global objeelives. These were called
I
i
,
16 Section 1 The Taxonomy: Educational Objectives and Student Leaming
edueational objeetives. The following objectives, taken from the Handbook, iI-
lustrate the nalure and inereased specificity of educational objectives:
• "The ability to re~d musical seores" (p. 92)
• "The ability lo interpret various types of social data" (p. 94)
• "Skill in distinguishing facts from hypotheses" (p. 146)
~o~sistent with Tyler's description of edueational objectives, each of these ob-
Jectives descnbes a student behavior (e.g., to re~<:I,to interpret, to distinguish)
~d some .cantent tople (e.g., musical scores, various types of social data, facts
ana hypotheses) on whieh the behavior will be performed.
Edu~a.~".ll , ª19IJjf: !;tiY."~ ~eupy the middle range on the objective contin-
uum. As such, .they are more specific Than global objectives but mc"'e'iéiiéral
than the obJ~chves needed to guide the day-to-day dassroom instruetion that
t ,:~ ª,ers provide.
INSTRUCTIONAL. OBJECTIVES
Subsequent to publication of the Handbook, educational trends ereated a need
for even ~ lllo.!~ __ s~edficobjec~y~s (Airasian, 1994; Sosniak, 1994). The purpose
of thesé ',l' ~ tr'!.ct~ ,: nal, obJ~.~! ~V~~ w~s to focus teaehing and testing on n;U'r9¿v,
~ay-to-Jay sTlces ofleammg m falrly specific eontent areas. Examples of iii-
struetional objectives follow: '
• The student is able to differentiate among four coromon punctuation
marks.
• The student learns to add two one-digit numbers.
• The student is able to cite three causes of the Civil War.
• The student is able to dassify objectives as global, edueational or
instructional. '
~tI1l.c.ti0nal objectives have substantially greater specificity than educational
obJectives.
--
_ ..
SUMMARY OF LEVEL.S OF OBJECTIVES
Table 2.1 compares the scope, time dimension, function, and use of the three
levels of objectives. In terms of scope, global objectives are "broad," whereas
Ins~~tional obJectives are "narrow"; that is, global objectives do no! deal with
speciflcs, and 1flStructional objectives deal only with specifics. Global objectives
may requlre oneor even many years to I~am, whereas instructional objectives
can be mastered m a few days. Global obJeroves provide vision that quite ofien
becomes the basis for support for edueational programs. At the other end of the
Spectrum, instructional objectives are useful for planning daily lessons.
.In the rruddle of the continuum lie edueational objectives. They are moder-
ate m seope and provide the basis for planning units eontaining objeetives that
Chapler 2 The Structure, Specificity, and Problems olObjectives
17
TABLE 2.1 Relationship of Global, Educationa~ and Instructional Objectives
LEVEL OF OBJECTlVE
GLOBAL
EOUCATIONAL.
INSTRUCTlONAL
SCOPE Broad
TIME NEEDED TO LEARN One or more years
(often many)
PURPOSE OR FUNCTION Provide vision
EXAMPLE OF USE Plan a multiyear
eurriculum (e.g., ele-
mentary reading)
Moderate
Weeks or months
Design currieulum
Plan units of
instruetion
Narrow
Hours or days
Prepare lesson plans
Plan daily aetivities,
experiences, and
exercises
require weeks or months to leam. Our framework is designed to facilita te
working with edueational objectives.
WHAT OS.JECTIVES ARE NOT
To this point we have discussed what objeetives are. We now discuss what ob-
jeetives are noto Sorne eduealors have a tendeney to eonfuse means and ends.
Objectives dese~ibe ends ___ ~tended results, intended outcomes, .intended
e'!lan~es. Ipstructi,onafaCtivit¡e Si, sueh as_ ~~ºmgJhetextb~k:, Ij.stenmg tO,~, the
~ teacher, coriduc.tmgan experlment, and gomg on a fleld trip, are all mealls
_ by ·
Yi!licIl' objeetives are aehieved. Stated simply , instructional activities, ifehosen
wiseiy and used properly, lead to the aehieveme!'t of stated objecti.ves. To ~mpllaslZe
the differenee between Íneans and ends~etween instruroonal aehVI-
ties and objectives--the phrases "b.~,al:>le , Iº,:: 9r "Ieam to"are either included
or impliedin our statements oí objectives. Thus, for example, "Students will
I",arn t9 ap¡iJy Ihecnteria forwriting coherent paragraphs" is a statement of an
9bjecR ve. The aet of writing paragraphs is anaetivity that may or may not lead
!o the objective.Siffiilifrly,"Students willleam thealgorithm for solving simu~taneous
equations in two unknowns" is an objeetive. The aet of workmg on SI-
multaneous equations is an activity. Once again, students may or may not leam
io solve simultaneous equations by working on them.
, When objeetives are not stated explicitly, they are often. implieit in the in-
structiorúi!activity. For example, an aetivity rnight be for students to "read The
·Sun Also Rises." To determine the objective associated with fuis activity, we can
ask the teacher, "What do you want your students to leam by reading The Sun
AIso Rises?" The answer to fuis question is the objective (e.g.,
"1 want my stu-
dents to understand Hemingway's skill as a writer"). If mult!p'le ans.'Y~~ are
given, there are Iikely to be multiple objectives.
. Justas iJ}st1:Y- _ ,,!!on!,1 aeti" ities are notobjectives, neither are tests or other
form.s"of 'assessment. For example, "Students should be able to pass the
18 Sectian 1 The Taxanarny: Educatianal Objectives and Student Learning
state."'ide high school proficieney test" is not an edueational objeetive. Tode-
temune the edueational objeetive, we must seek out the kn()wledge an<!sogci-
tiv~ processes. studenls must le'!'TI or possess to pass the test. .
. . In sumrnary, it is important not to eonfuse objeetives with instruetional ae-
liV1~les .or assessmen~: Although eaeh of these can be used to help identifyand
elanfJ:' ~te~ded student learning outeomes, it is OlUy after ano aetivity o~ , assessc ,
ment IS articulat~m terms oi , mtended; student learning, that the objective be-
comes eVldenf. -
-
.
_____ . .
_ _ _
A CHANGING VOCABULARY OF OBJECTIYES
As mentioned in Chapter 1, .objective is not the only terrn used to describe an in-
}en~ed student I~arning outeome .. The voeabulary of intended student learn-
mg lS e~er:changmg.Today's terminology is driven by the eurrent emphasis on
sehoollmprovement through stanfia-!:?s-based edueation. At the heart of the
stand.ards-based move~ent IS thEl.staterlevel speeifieation of intended student
learn~g outeomes ID dliferent su6ject matters at eaeh grade level. Generally,
statewlde assessment prograrns linked to the standards are intended to moni-
ffil~e extent to whi~~in " d ! vidual students and entire sChools haveashlev~a
· Despit.e the reeent ehanges in voeabulary, the various terms used in con-
Junctio~ WIth state standa~dsJit nieeJy into the three levels of objectives: global,
edueatlOnaC a~d IDstruelional. The following two standard s are taken from
Sou?, Carolma s pnmary grades mathematics eurriculum. In primary mathe-
malies, students will:
• ~stablish a. strong sense of number by exploring eoneepls sueh as eount-
mg, groupmg, place value, and estimating; and
• Develop the eoneepts of iraetions, mixed numbers, and decimals and use
models to relate fraetions to decimals and to find equivalent fraetions.
Though not quite as general as earlíer examples of global objeetives, these stan-
dards are best conSldered glob.al objectives because they inelude broad tapies
(e.g., sense of number) or mulliple toples (e.g., fraetions, mixed numbers, deci-
mals) and rather vaS':'e processes (e.g., estab~h, explore, and develop).
To assess the attamment of these standards, teachers in South Carolina are
P' !ovi de~lv . it~ m~r~ s¡;ecili~ . ."l:ijeetives ealled'Ünd¡cato~~" for eaeh stand. ard.
For the first standard aboye, sample indicatars indude: .... ' . '
-
.
• Studenls will be able to write whole numbers in standard forrn, expanded
form, and words; and
• Students willlearn to estimate the number of objects in a variety of
eolleelions.
For the seeond standard, sample indicators include:
• Stu~ents will understand the meaning of fraetions, mixed numbers and
declmals; and '
Chapter 2 The Structure, Specificity, and Problerns af Objectives 19
• Students will interpret concrete or pietorial models that represent frae-
tions, mixed numbers, decimals, and their relationships.
These indicators most closely resemble educational objectives, insofar as they
narrow the specifieity of the global standard s to the unit level but not to the les-
son level.
Objectives are used not only instandards~based eurrieulurns but also in
~tatewide and distriet-wide aeeountability programs designed to determine,
among other things, whether a student wiJI be plaeed in a remedial elass,
awarded a high sehool diploma; or promoted to the next grade. When the re-
sults of testing are eonsequential for students or teachers, litigation becomes a
possible threa!. An aeeountability program that is linked to elear, publicly
stated objeetives and standards provides sorne legal proteetion.
Objectives, in the form of subject matter standards, have been produeed by
a variety of professional organizations and assoeiations (e.g., American Associ-
ation for the Advaneement of Scienee, 1993; National Council for the Social
Studies, 1994; National Couneil of Teaehers of English and International Read-
ing Association, 1996; National Research Council, 1996). The National Couneil
of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) (1989) was the first association to reeom-
mend what were ealled 'Content standards. One of the NCTM standards sta tes:
"In grades 5-8, the mathematics curricufum should inelude ~xplo1'ations of
a)gebrá.le eoneepts ·andprocesses." Note thát this "standard" describes what
Ibe cUl'úewu¡n should inelude (i.e., the eontent), not what students are to learo
fr9m it (Le., the objective). Thl1s, !his eontent standard does not meet our cri~erla
for objectives. However, trus eoritentstandatd can quite easily be translated
'into an educational objective. Examples include: "Thestudent should under-
; st ~ nd the.eoneepts of variable, expression, and equation"; "The student should
learo -¡o ";maTyze {ables and graphs to ideÍltify properties and relationships";
,.nd "Thes~de)'\t~hould be able to apply algebraic methoq,; to salve a variety
obeal-world and matlÍematicalproolems." . .
As mentioned earJier, most standards-based curriculums include both
global objeetives (i.e., standa~ds) to provide general expectations and educa-
tion.;(Q hjectiv'ei«(e., indicators) to guide the design of curriculum units. Since
it is diffieult to make statewide or national pronouneements regarding the
specifics of classroom teaching, standards-based approaches leave the devel-
opment of instructional objectives to classroom teaehers. To develop instrue-
tional objeetives from indieators, a teaeher eontinues to narrow the eognitive
p,oeess. and eontent kn0'Wledge. Conside,,_ {or e~~J?le, the following educa-
tional objective/indicator: "Students will'understani;t!he meaning 9f fraetions,
mixed numbers, and decunals." Associated' ¡!l~hii¿tional objectiv~ might in-
'elude: "Students willlearn to write decimals as fraelions and fraetions as deci-
mals"; "Studenls will be able towrlte equivalentfraetions"; and "Students will
leam to wrile mixed numbers as improper fractions and decimals."
, When there are no specific instruetional objectives, leachers often tum to
the assessment instruments to clarify the meaning and instructional focus of
global and edueational objectives. In these situations, assessment tasks de facto
20 Section 1 The Taxonomy: Educational Objectives and Studenl Learning
become lhe educational or instructional objeelives. Although this is a time-
honored practice, it often leads to concerns about teaching to the test.
PROBLEMS WITH OB.JECTIVES
Despite the many and widespread uses of objectives in education, authors
have raised concerns about their adequacy and consequences (Furst, 1981; De-
Landsheere, 1977; Dunne, 1988). In this section we explore sorne of these con-
cerns, addressing particular issues related to the specificity of objeelives, their
relationship to teaching, and their cJaimed value-free status vis-a-vis educa-
tional philosophy and curriculum.
SPECIFICITY AND INCLUSIVENESS
Even before the publication of the Handbook in 1956, a debate was ongoing
about how specific objectives should be. Because global objectives are too gen-
eral to be of practical use in guiding instruelion and assessment, the main de-
bate has focused on educational and instructional objectives.
Like global objectives, educational objectives are criticized as being too
general lo guide teaching and assessment. They do not provide teachers the
specific direction they need to plan, facilita te, and assess student learning
(Mager, 1962; Popham, 1969). This argument has sorne trulh. As noted earlier,
however, it is also true Ihat educational objectives convey a more open, richer
sense of intended student learning than that conveyed by narrower instruc-
tional objectives. The authors of the Handbook recognized this point and con-
sciously rejected overly narrow objectives, seeking instead objectives that had
"a level of generality where the loss by fragmentation would not be too great"
(p. 6) : ~ºuqltional objectives were 10 pr9vide a path to more specific instruc-
t!onal objectives; but Ihe authors aimed to identify theforest'Pefore pr;"'eeding
lo Ihe , trees.
Moreover, ~ucational objectives aUow for cJassroom teachers to interpret
a~d select the aspects of the educational objective Ihat fit their particular stu-
dents' needs and readiness. This benefit is cónsistent with Ihe current empha-
sis on teacher judgment and empowerment. Many who criticize objectives for
being overly spedfic, constraining, and "behavioral" may not adequately dif-
ferentiate educational objectives from instructional objectives,
Although the specificity of instructional objectives provides a focus for
instruction and assessment, such specificity can lead to large numbers of atom-
istic, narrow objectives, The question then becomes whether these specific ob-
jectives wiU coalesce into broader, integrated understandings that are more
than the sum of the individual objectives (Broudy, 1970; Dunne, 1988; Hirst,
1974).
On a related maller, critics have argued that no! a11 important leaf!1ÍIlg out-
comes can be made explicit or operational (Dunne, 1988; Arrnstrong, 1989;
Marsh, 1992) and Ihat Ihe role of tadt understanding and open-ended situations
was underrepresented in the Handbook. There is, for example, a difference be-
Chapler 2 The Structure, Specificity, and Problems oi Objectives 21
tw~n lea!'Iling e;><periences that are expecled to leadtocol)l!J)on leammg 0),\1,
-
com~" and Ihose , lhat are intended tO,lead to idiosyncratic learning"q¡'jectiv'es are
nÍ.e~t - ;:o-describe the former. Allhough lea!fiing does resllll ír<:>rnlhe laller exp,e-'
riences, it is virtuaUy impossible to specify fue nature of lhat learning in advance.
The lesson from discussions about intended versus unintended learning
outcomes is thal not,;aU importanl learning outcomes can, should, or musl be
slated as a priori objectives. This assertion, however, should not detereHorts lo
articulate important jntended student learning outcomes, even though these
m~'ynot be theonly outcOlnes,tl:lal resu)t fronl¡dassroom instructió1),
THE LOCK-STEP NATURE OF OBJECTIVES
A variation on the theme aboye is the criticism of the lock-step nature of objec-
tives that prescribe the same intended learning outcomes for aU students. Eis-
ner (1979) poinled oul lhal not a11 objectives needloproduce Ihe same studenl
learning. In fael, Eisner identifies t expressive outcomes," which he defines as
'¡the consequences of cun:iculum actjviti~s that are intentiona11y planned to
provide afertikfiel. qfor personal purposing and experie;,ce" (p. 103): A~ ex-
pressive outcome may derive from anexF~rience or actIvlly s~ch as v1sllmg a
musetlffi, seeing a play, or listening to classlcal mUSlC. Expresslve outcomes re-
sull from activities that have no a priori intended learning oulcome except tha!
eaCh Siudent will be uniquely changed in sorne way from exposure lo the ex-
pefience or activity. SUc:h outcomes are evocative, not p~scriptive, in Ihe sense
lhat pu!"!,ose goes not precede Ihe activity but rather uruquely grows from 1t.
Expressive outcome activities resul,t in learning, but what studen~s are
exp.ected to learn from participating in Ihese activities cannot be stated m ad-
v· anee. Furthermore, what is learned willlikely differ from one student to an-
'otiler. Note that expressive óbjédives may be,more appl!cable to certain subject
areas th;;iiothers and to more complex forms of cognition than less complex
on~ " TI\eypro";ide a 4irection for learning but not a particular destina/ion.
To someextent, all objectives are expressive, in Ihat not a11 students)earn
the same things from the same instruction even when Ihe intended objective is
!he same. Ancillary learning is always going on. The current emphasis on per-
formance assessmenl or authentic assessment encourages the use of assess-
~ent . procedureS' that allow "tudents 10(produée)a variety of ,\cceJ'tableré-
. sponses to the sam~ assessment t.Mk.l>r ,s. e! of tasks. Although thes~ newer
'fQrms óf assessment <1,0 not qllÍte ¡nirror the nature of expresslve ob¡ectIves"
~!iey are Clearly irItended lo do so. W ~ .'uerely pO , i"t out Ihat these, fo~ms of as-
sessment are more likely to be appropriate for educal!"na1 ~b¡ectIv~. thª-n for
d;l~bal and instrÍlctiónal objectives.· '
VVHAT DOES AN OB~ECTIVE REPRESENT-LEARNING OR PERFORMANCE?
At the heart of many criticisms of objectives is the question of what an objec-
tive really represenls (Hirst, 1974; Ginlher, 1972). For example, the more spe-
cific an objective is, the easier it is to assess, but also the more likely we are to
•
Chapter 2 The Structure, Specificity, and Problems 01 Objectives 23
22 Section 1 The Taxonorny: Educational Objectives and Student Learning
blur the distinction between the intended meaning of the objective and its as-
sessment. Stated simply, the ~ssessed perform.ance is used to make inferences
,about intended student learning as it is described in the objectives. So-ca11ed
J?erLormJmc~ ()Qjectives to tb-econtrary, performance i$ no! the objectiveper se.
Furthermore, wlth few exceptions, the tasks (e.g., questions, test items,
problems) used to assess an objective are only a sample of the possible tasks
tllatcould be used. Consider the fo11owing instructional objective: "The stu-
dent wlllleam to add three two-digit numbers with regrouping." This objec:c
tivec~n ~e~ssessed bymany items,because of the many possible two"digit
\. combmations' from which to select (e.g., 25 + 12 + 65; 15 + 23 + 42; 89 + 96 + 65).
Inevllaoly, teachers select a s~ple of the possible tasks and use slude"ts'. per-
formance on that sample to mfer how they would do on other shmlar, but
unas.sessed, tasks. The more general an objective, the larger the universeQf.
posslble ass"ssment tasks. . . o"
, .- Now compare the relatively narrow range of evidence needed to assess the
two-digit addition objective with the broader range of evidence needed to as-
sess learning of the fo11owing educational objective: "The student willleam to
~pply various economic theories." The specificity of the first objective permits
inferences to be made about student learning from relatively few assessment
tasks. In co~tras.t, the .second objectiveoil; much broaqer, thereby a110wing for
an almost~lImted set of assessment tasks:'Because any single assessment can
s~mple muy a sma11 portion of the assessment tasks, the more general an objec-
tlve, the less confid~nt one is about how adequately a sludent's performance
~ahdl~ represents his or her learning across its ful! breadth. Again, this concern
lS pafticularly salient when objectives emphasize more general knowl"dge cat-
egones or more complex cognitive processes.
THE RESTRICTED USE OF OB.JECTIYES
Critics have pointed out that the ease of stating objectives differs greatly from
one .subJec.t m~tter. to another (Stenhouse, 1970-71; Seddon, 1978; Ke11y, 1989).
Statmg obJectives m creative writing, poetry, and art interpretation, for exam-
pIe, may be difficult. When required to formulate objectives, teachers in these
areas may select lower-level objectives that are easy to state but do not rea11y
represent what they believe to be important for their sludents to leam. Alterna-
tively, obje~ti,:es that appear to caH for complex sludent learning may not actu-
a11y ~o ~o m hgh.t oí how the objectives are taught and/or assessed. Correctly _
classlfymg an obJective requires either knowing or inferring how the objective
_ was taught by the teacher and learned by the sludent. .. o ___ . . _.
. In sorne subject areas, it may be easy to state objectives but difficult to ob-
tam broad .community endorsement for the objectives. EspecíaHy ¡i¡siib]ect;;"
such as socral sludles, sex education, and religion, differences in values ancl po-
litical VleWS lead to difficulties in reaching a consensus about the apprQprÚlle-
ness of state~ obJectlves. In these cases it is usua11y easier to obtain ag!'eement
on global obJectives (e.g., good citizenship) than on more specific educati()nal
and instructionalones. .0··· o ..
~ Difficulty·is inherent in stating objectives in sorne areas and in obtaining
consensus on objectives in others. In fact, these are the two reasons that o .!?jec-
uves in sorne subject areas are limited, if they are stated at a).1. Given the impor-
tance of objectives, however, these problerns are to be overcome, not avoided.
CONCLUDING COMMENT
Our framework is atool to help educatorsi¡:larify and.communicate what they
intend sludents to leam as a result of instruction. We ca11 these intentions "ob-
jecti"ves." To facilitate communication, we have adopted a standard format for
stating objectives: "The student will be able to, or leam to, verb noun," where
tIté verb indicates the cognitive process and the noun genera11y indicates the
knowledge. Furthermore, although objectives can range from very broad to
. highly specific, we prefer and "dvocate the use of the midrange, !hat is, educa-
tional objectives.
Our focus on objectives does not encompass a11 possible and important slu-
dentleaining outcomes, in part because we focus exclusively on cognitive out-
comes. In addition, we do not deny that incidentallearning takes place in every
scllool and classroom. Where learning cannot be anticipated, however, it lies
beyond the scope of our work. Similarly, expressive experiences produce a
myriad of unanticipated reactions and responses that depend largely on the
sludents themselves. Our omission of incidentallearning and expressive expe-
riences does not mean they are not important or useful in many siluations.
In sum, our emphasis is on sludent-oriented, learning-based" explicit, and
assessabÚ; statements of intende.d cognitive outcomes. By adopting this em-
pJ1.asis, we are fo11owing the lead of the authors of the original Handbook. We
have, like them, endeavored to produce a framework that we anticipate wi11 be
used in many but not a11 ways, by many but not a11 educators.
SECTION 11
The Revised
Taxonomy Structure
25
CHAPTER 3
The Taxonomy Table
As we mentioned in Chapter 1, our framework can be represented in a two-
dimensional table that we call the Taxonorny Table (see Table 3.1. For conve-
nient reference, it is also reproduced on lhe inside front cover). The rows and
columns oI the table contain careIully delineated and defined categories of
knowledge and cognitive processes, respectively. The cells of the table are
where lhe knowledge and cognitive process dirnensions intersecl. Objectives,
either explicitly or implicitly, indude both knowledge and cognitive processes
lhat can be dassified in the Taxonomy framework. Therefore, objectives can be
placed in lhe cells of lhe table. It should be possible to place any educational
objective !hat has a cognitive ernphasis in one or more cells of lhe table.
CATEGORIES OF THE KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION
After considering lhe various designations of knowledge types, especially de-
velopments in cognitive psychology that have taken place sin€e the original
framework's creation, we settled on four general types of knowledge: Factual,
Conceptual, Procedural, and Metacognitive. Table 3.2 surnmarizes lhese Iour ma-
jor types oI knowledge and their assodated subtypes.
Factual knoUiledge is knowledge of discrete, isolated content elements-
"bits of inIorrnation" (p. 45). It indudes knowledge oI terminology and knowl-
edge oI specific details and elements. In contrasl, Conceptual knoUiledge is
knowledge of "more complex, organized knowledge forrns" (p. 48). It indudes
knowledge oI dassifications and categories, principIes and generalizations,
and lheories, models, and structures.
Procedural knOUiledge is "knowledge of how to do something" (p. 52). It in-
dudes knowledge of skills and algorithms, techniques and melhods, as well as
knowledge oI lhe criteria used to determine and/or justify "when lo do what"
within specific domains and disciplines. Finally, Metacognitive knowledge is
"knowledge about cognition in general as well as awareness of and knowledge
about one's own cognition" (p. 55). It encompasses strategic knowledge; knowl-
edge about cognitive tasks, induding contextual and conditional knowledge;
and self-knowledge. Of course, cerlain aspects of metacognitive knowledge are
27
..
3.1 THE TAXONOMY TABLE
3.2 THE MAJOR TYPES AND SUBTYPES OF THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION*
.
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
MA~OR TVPES AND SUBTYPES EXAMPLES
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION 1. REMEMBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLY 4. ANALYZE S. EVALUATE 6.
CREATE
A ...... c:TU ... L KNOWLE_E-The basle e1ement8 student8 must know ro be acquaintcd with a
disciplillE' or solve problems in it
A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
AA. Knowledge of terminology Techrúcal vocabulary, musical symbols
Aa. Knowledge of specific details and Major natural resources, reliable sources of
elements information
B. CONCEPTU"'L KNOW .... DOE-The interrelationships among the basic element8 within a larger
structure that en.lble them to function togetho>r
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
BA. Knowledge DE classifications and categories ownership
Ba. Knowledge oE principIes and generalizations
Bc:. Knowledge of theories, models, and structures
Periods DE geologicaJ. time, forms oE business
Pythagorean theorem, law oE supply and demand
Theory of evolution, structure of Congress
C. I'ItOCEDU"AL KNOWU!:DOE-How to do somethJng, methods of inquiry, and criteria for using
skills, algorithms, techniques, and methods
C.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
CA. Knowledge DE subject-specific skills and Skills uSed in painting with watercolors,
algorithms whole-number division algorithm
Ca. Knowledge of subject-specific techniques Interviewing techniques, scientific method
andmethods
Cc:. Knowledge oE criteria Eor determining when to use appropriate procedures Criteria used to determine when to applya
procedure involving Newton's second law, criteria
used to judge the feasibility oí using a particular
method to estimate business costs
D. Mn ... CDONITIVE KNOWLEDGE-Knowledge of cognition in general as we1I as awareness and
knowledge of ooe'$ own cognition
D.
META·
COGNITIVE
KNOWLEDGE
DA. Strategic knowledge Knowledge of outlining as a means of capturing
the structure of a unit of subject malter in a text-
book, knowledge oí the use oí heuristics
Da. Knowledge about cognitive tasks, Knowledge of the types of tests particular teachers
including appropriate contextual and administer, knowledge of the cognitive demands
conditional knowledge of different tasks
De. Self-knowledge Knowledge that critiquing essays is a personal
strength, whereas writing essays is a personal weak-
ness; awareness of one's own knowledge level
28
29
30 Section n The Revised Taxonorny Structure
nol fue same as knowledge fual is defined consensually by experls. TItis issue is
discussed in more delail in Chapter 4.
CATEGORIES OF THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
The categories ol Ihe cognitive process dimension are intended lo provide a
comprehensive set 01 elassifications lor !hose studenl cognitive processes Ihal
are ineluded in objectives. As shown in Table 3.1, Ihe categories range from fue
cognitive processes mosl cornmonly lound in objectives, fuose associaled wilh
Remember, Ihrough Understand and App/y, lo Ihose less frequently lound, Ana-
/yze, Eva/uate, and Create. Remember means fo retrieve relevanl knowledge lrom
long-Ierm memory. Understand is delined as conslructing the meaning of
instruclional messages, including oral, written, and graphic cornmunicalion.
App/y means carrying oul or using a procedure in a given situation. Ana/yze is
breaking malerial inlo ils constituenl parls and delennining how Ihe parts are
re[aled lo one anolher as well as lo an overall slructure or purpose. Eva/uate
means making judgments based on criteria andj or slandards. Finally, Create is
putting elements togelher to fonn a novel, coherenl whole or to make an origi-
nal product.
Each of Ihe six major categories is associated wilh two or more specific cog-
nitive pracesses, 19 in alI, also described by verb forms (see Table 3.3). To dif-
ferentiate fue specific cognitive pracesses from Ihe six calegories, Ihe specilic
cognitive processes take the fonn of gerunds, ending in "ing." Thus, recogniz-
ing and recalling are associaled with Remember; interpreting, exemplifying, clas-
sifying, summarizing, inferring, comparing, and explaining are associated with
Understand; executing and imp/ementing wifu Apply; and so on.
THE TAXONOMY TABLE AND OBJECTIVES:
A DIAGRAMMATIC SUMMARY
Figure 3.1 depicls Ihe analylic journey from fue slalemenl ol an objective lo its
placement in the Taxonomy Table. The journey begins by locating Ihe verb and
noun in Ihe objective. The verb is examined in Ihe contexl ol !he six categories
01 Ihe cogniiive process dimensiono Remember, Understand, Apply, Analyze, Eval-
uate, and Create. Placing Ihe verb inlo fue appropriate category is usually facili-
tated by locusing initially on fue 19 specific cognitive processes, rather than on
the larger calegories. Ukewise, Ihe noun is examined in fue conlexl 01 Ihe four
types in fue knowledge dimensiono Factual, Crrnceptual, Procedural, and Metacog-
nitive. Again, focusing initially on Ihe subtypes within Ihe knowledge cate-
gories typically aids in the proper placement. One can elassify Ihe objective as
initially slated, as il was taught, and as it was assessed, and ask whether Ihese
classifications are aligned. This latter process is illustraled in Ihe vignettes in
Chaplers 8-13.
Consider Ihe rather straightforward example shown in Figure 3.1: "The
studenl willlearn lo apply fue reduce-reuse-recyele approach lO conservation."
3.3 THE SIX CATEGORIES OF THE COGNITIYE PROCESS
DIMENSION AND RELATED COGNITIYE PROCESSES*
PROCESS COGNITIVE PROCESSES
CATEGORIES AND EXAMPLES
,. ItJ:MEM.II_Rt'triev~ relevant knowledge from Iong-term memory.
'
.1 RECOGN.Z.ING t.2 RECALLING a. (e.g., Rerognize fue dates of important events in U.S. history)
(e.g., Recall fue dates of important events in U.S. history)
UNDEIt"'AN~Ol18truct meaning from instructional messagcs, includlng or;U, written, and graphic commu-
nication.
2.1 INTERPRETING (e.g., Paraphrase important speeches and documents)
2.2 EXILMPLIFYING (e.g., Give examples of various artistic painting styles)
2 . 3 CLASSIFYING (e.g., Classify observed or described cases 01 mental disorders)
2.4 SUMMARIZING (e.g., Write a short summary of fue events portrayed on videotapes)
2.5 INFERRING (e.g., In leaming a foreign language, infer grarnmatical principies from examples)
2.6 COMPAR.NG (e.g., Compare historical events to contemporary situations)
2.7 EXPLAINING (e.g., Explain fue causes of important eighteenth-century events in France)
3. APPLY---Carry out or use a procedUft! in a givt!l\ situation.
3.1 I:xl!CUTING 3.2 IMPLI!:MENTING 4. (e.g., Divide one whole number by another whole number, both with multiple digits)
(e.g., Determine in which situations Newlon's second law is appropriate)
ANALYZE--Break material into ronstituent parts and determine ha .... parts relate lo onc another and lo anover-
allstructure or p~
4. f DIFFERENTIATING 4.2 ORGANIZING 4.3 ATTRISUTING (e.g., Distinguish between relevant and irrelevant numbers in a mathematical
word problem)
(e.g., Structure evidence in a historical description into evidence for and against a
particular historical explanation)
(e.g., Determine fue point of view 01 the author of an essay in terms of rus
or her political perspective)
s. EVALUATI:-Make ¡udgmenl!l bwIed on criteria and &tandards.
!l. t CHECKING s .a CRITIQUING. (e.g., Determine whether a scientist's conclusions follow from observed data)
(e.g., Judge which of two me!hods is !he best way to solve a given problem)
s. CRI:ATI:-Put ~t.men\s ~ to lorm a coherent or functional whole; reorganize elroIenr. inlo a new pattem
oc !IIructure.
8.' GENERATING. 8 . 2 PLA"NING 6.3 PRODUCING. (e.g., Generate hypo!heses to acount for an observed phenomenon)
(e.g., Plan a research paper on a given historical topic)
(e.g., Build habitats for certain species lor certain purposes)
31
32 Section II The Revised Taxonomy Structure
FIGURE 3.1 How AN OBJECTlVE (THE STUDENT WILL LEARN TO APPLY THE REDUCE-REUSE-
RECYCLE APPROACH TO CONSERVATION) 15 CLASSIFIED IN T T HE AXONOMY TABLE
Educational Objective
approach to conservation.
/ The student willlearn to apply the reduce-reuse-recycle
~
Noun I V.rb
the reduce-reuse-recyde apply
approach to conservation I
f
Knowledge Dimension Cognitive Process Dimension
A. Factual knowledge 1. Remember
B. Conceptual knowledge 2. Understand
\ c. Procedural knowledge 3. Apply (apply)
approach to conservation) D. Metacagnative knowledge (the reduce-reuse-recycle / 4. Analyze
5. Evaluate
6. Create
I
THI! COGNITII..OCESS DIMEN510N
THE DIMENSION REMI!III •• R UND.II:RSTAND .r KNOWLEDGI! .. .. 4. s. 6.
A.PLT ANALYZI! EVALUATIE C.ltATE
A.
FACTUAL
B.
CONCIEPTUAL
c. '-----------PROCEDU ....... r-a..
X~
The student willlearn
to apply the reduce-re use-
recycle approach to
conservation.
D.
M.II:TA-
COGNITIVE
Chapler 3 The Taxonomy Table 33
The verb is "apply." Since Apply is one of lhe six cognitive process categories,
we have to look no furlher lhan lhe six categories in this example. The noun
phrase is "lhe reduce-reuse-recycle approach to conservation." An approach is
a melhod or technique, and in Table 3.2 methods and techniques are associated
wilh Procedural knowledge. Thus, this objective is placed in the cell correspond-
ing to lhe intersection of Apply and Procedural knowledge.
Unfortunately, classifying objectives is oflen more difficult lhan this exarn-
pie suggests. There are two reasons for this difficulty. The first is that state-
ments of objectives may contain more than verbs and nouns. In the objective
"The student will be able to give examples of lhe law of supply and demand in
lhe local cornrnunity," for example, lhe phrase "in lhe local cornrnunity" is ex-
traneous for our classification. The verb is "exemplify" (i.e., "to give exam-
pies") and lhe noun phrase is "lhe law of supply and demand." The phrase "in
the local community" estabJishes the conditions wilhin which lhe examples
must be selected.
Consider a third objective: "The student will be able to produce original
works lhat meel lhe criteria of appropriate oral and written forrns." The verb is
"produce" and lhe noun is "criteria." The phrase "of appropriate oral and writ-
ten forms" simply clarifies the meaning of "criteria." So, modifying phrases or
clauses should be ignored in classifying lhe objective; lhey may cause confu-
sion when one is attempting to identify relevant parts for categorizing.
The second reason for lhe difficulty in classifying objectives is !hat lhe verb
may be ambiguous in terrns of lhe intend~d cognitive process or lhe noun may
be ambiguous in its inlended knowledge. Consider the following objective:
"The student willlearn to describe changes in matter and the causes of Ihose
changes." "Describe" can mean many things. Students can describe what lhey
have recalled, interpreted, explained, or generated. Recalling, interpreting, ex-
plaining, and generating are quite different processes. One would have to infer
which process lhe teacher intended in order to classify lhe objective.
Similarly, in sorne statements of objectives, the noun tells us Jittle if any-
thing about the relevant knowledge. This is a particular problem wilh objectives
lhat address more complex cognitive processes. Consider the following objec-
tive: "The student will be able to evaluate editorials in newspapers and news
magazines." The verb is "evaluate," and the noun pillase is "editorials in news-
papers and news magazines." As we discussed in Chapter 2, editorials are cur-
ricular or instructional materials, not knowledge. In this case, lhe knowledge is
impJicit-narnely, lhe criteria students should use to evaluate lhe editorials (e.g.,
presence or absence of bias, clarity of point of view, logic of lhe argurnent). So,
lhe objective should be classified as Evaluate and Conceptual knowledge.
It should now be evident that the people who are classifying objectives
must make inferences. Consider lhe following two objectives; lhe fust is rather
straightforward, and lhe second requires more inference.
The first objective is "The student should be able to plan a unit of instruc-
tion for a particular teaching situation" (Handbook, p. 171). This objective com-
bines the unit plan (lhe noun) with the ael of planning (the verb). Where does
this objective fit in the Taxonomy Table? Plans are models lhat guide future
-
34 Section II The Revised Taxonorny Structure
aetions. Referring baek to Table 3.2, we see th.t "models" appears in the third
subtype of Conceptual knowledge, the seeond row of the Taxonomy T.ble (Le.,
row B). Referring to T.ble 3.3, we see Ihal "planning" is the second cognitive
process wilhin Create, the sixlh column of the Taxonomy Table (ie., column 6).
Our analysis suggests that the objeetive falls into the cell eorresponding lo fue
interseetion of row B, Conceplual knowledge, and column 6, Crea/e. This objec-
tive, then, has lo do wilh students creating conceptual knowledge.
The second objective is "The student should be able lo recognize the point
of view or bias of a writer of a historieal aeeount" (Handbook, p. 148). In lhis case,
the noun is "historieal aceount." Like textbooks and essays, a historieaJ .ccount
is best considered curricular or instructional material. The question remains,
then, what type of knowledge is involved. We suggest two possibilities: Factual
knowledge or Conceptual knowledge. Which type it is depends on (1) the structure
of the aeeount, (2) the w.y the .ccount is "inlroduced" to the students, or most
Iikely (3) sorne combin.tion of these. The verb phrase is "reeognize the point of
view or bias." The verb is not "recognize," If it were "recognize," w e would
place il in fue e.tegory Remember. However, the .et of reeognizing (ie., deter-
mining) • poinl of view or bias defines the cognitive process attributing (see
Table 3.3). Attributing is .ssoci.ted with Analyze, a calegory at a mueh higher
level of complexity. So we place the objeetive somewhere in the fourth column,
Analyze. Sinee the knowledge could be either of two types, Factual knowledge or
Conceptual knowledge, we place the objective in two cells, one corresponding to
the intersection of Analyze and Factual knowledge (cell A4) and fue other to the
intersection of Analyze and Conceptual knowledge (eell B4).
To eonfuse maUers even further, the teaeher could teaeh students how to
recognize points of view or biases, and this would be Procedural knowledge.
Since students would be expected to use the Procedural knowledge (as laugbt to
fuem) wifu fue historical .ccount, the eognitive process c.legory would Iikely
shift from Analyze to Apply. Now the objeetive would be placed in cell C3.
In summary, then, the T.xonomy Table can be used to categorize objec-
tives, provided fu. t the person or persons doing the categoriz.tion m.ke cor-
reet inferences. Bec.use inference is involved and because eaeh person may
have access to differenl information, individuals may disagree about fue cor-
reel dassification of an objective. As seen Ihrougbout this ehapler, the mosl
obvious souice of information is Ihe objective as slaled, bul the stated objeetive
and Ihe objeetive as taught and assessed may differ. So, other sources of infor-
mation to be considered are observations of dassrooms, examinalions oi test
ilems and other assessment tasks, and discussions with or among teaehers.
From our experience, using multiple sources of information is Iikely to resull
in the most valid, defensible dassifieation of objectives.
WHY CATEGORIZE OSJECTIVES?
Why would anyone want to categorize objectives? What is Ihe point oi using
our framework to guide the classifieation? We offer six answers to these ques-
tions. The first is that categorization within our framework permits educalors to ex-
amine objectives from Ihe student's point of view. What is it fual sludents musl
Chapter 3 The Taxonomy Table 315
know and be able to do in order to achieve. particular objective? Will. "gro-
cery list" of discrete faets suffice (Factual knowledge), or do sludents need sorne
cohesive structure thal holds these iacts logether (Conceptual know/edge)? Do stu-
denls need lo be able to classify (Understand), to differentiate (Analyze), or to do
both? We typically ask these questions as we work with objectives within our
framework in an attempt to answer the "Iearning question" (see Chapter 1).
Our second answer is that categorizalion within our framework helps educators
consider the panorama of possibilities in education. This was one of the primary val-
ues of the original Handbook, raising the possibility of leaching for so-called
higher-order objectives. Our revision adds the possibility and desirabilily of
objectives that emphasize Me/acognitive knowledge. Metacognitive knowledge is
empowering to students and is an important basis for "Iearning how lo leam"
(Bransford, Brown, and Cocking, 1999). Classifying objectives for this purpose
once again helps us address the "Iearning question."
The third answer is Ihat calegorization within our framework helps educalors
see the integral relalionship be/ween knowledge and cognitive processes inherenl in
objectives. Can students realistically be expecled to apply factual knowledge, or
is it easier far them if they are helped to understandprocedural knowledge before
they aUempl lo apply it? Can students learn to understand conceptual knowledge
by having them analyze factual knowledge? These are the types of queslions we
ask as we struggleto answer Ihe "instruction question."
Our fourfu answer lo the question of why anyone would want to cale-
gorize objectives is consistent with Ihe original Handbook: It makes life easier!
Wifu fue Taxonomy in place, examiners do not have to approach every objec-
tive as a unique entity. Rather, they can say to themselves, "Oh, lhis is an analy-
sis objective. I know how to wrile examination items for analysis objeclives."
They can pull out their "templales" (the sample test items in the Handbook) and,
with modifieations dietaled by differences in subject matlers, write several
items in a fairly short time. Thus, by dassifying objectives we are more able to
deal with the "assessmenl question.".
Likewise, we expecl those who use the Taxonomy Table to come lo a com-
mon realization: "Oh, this is an objective that emphasizes understanding concep-
tual knowledge. I know how to leaeh for Conceptual knowledge objeetives. 1 could
focus on criticaJ attribules oi fue coneepl. For many kinds of Conceptual knowl-
edge, I could indude examples ~d nonexamples. I may want to embed a par-
ticular concept within a larger conceptual framework and discuss similarilies
and differences within Ihe framework." Similar stalemenls can be made for as-
sessment: "1 could design assessmenl lasks fuat require studenls to exempliJy
and classiJy. I need to ensure that the assessment tasks are not identicaJ to those
in the textbook or those I used during dass." So, once again, dassifying objec-
tives helps us deal with the "instruction and assessment questions."
Our fifth answer is thal calegorization makes more readily apparenl Ihe consis-
tency, or lack of it, among the stated objeclives for a uni/, the way it was /aughl, and
how learning was assessed. Comparisons of the calegorizations based on slaled
objectives, instructional aclivities, and assessmenl tasks show whether these
phases of fue educational experience are congruent wilh one anolher both in
their nature and in their relative emphasis. An important cave.1 was suggested,
36 5ection JI The Revised Taxonomy Structure
however, by a teaeher, Melody Shank, who reviewed an earlier draft of our revi-
sion (personal eommunication, 1998):
1 can imagine leachers fretting over whether they placed their
objeclives, activities, and assessments in the proper cell ... inslead of
thoughlfully examining their implicil and explicil objectives, planned
activities, and assessmenls. Becoming aware of whether their planned
activities are aligned with their intended (stated or intuited) objectíves
and how they might adjust those activitíes is the importanl actívity,
not whether they have eaeh component instructíonal part in the
proper cell .... 1 wouJd want teaehers to have thoughtfuJ, productive
discussion throughoul the analysis, rather than arguments about the
proper placement of the iterns in the tableo
This comment sta tes well the emphasis that we place on the use of the Taxon-
omy Table and that will be exemplified in the later analysis of the vignettes. So,
classifying objectives helps educators deaJ with the "alignment question."
The sixth and final answer is Ihat categorization within our framework he/ps
educators make better sense of the wide variety of terms that are used in education. Our
19 cognitive processes have very specific meanings. Inferring requires thal stu-
denls recognize sorne paltern in the information given, whereas explaining
requires a seareh for causality in lhal pallern. Implementing requires adjusting a
process lo a new situalion; executing does nol. Generating requires divergenl
Ihinking, whereas organizing requires convergence. Checking concerns internal
consistency; crítiquing, consislency with external criteria. To Ihe extent that we
can associate other words arid terms with our framework, then, we increase
their level of precision. With increased precision comes the likelihood for beller
communication.
OUR USE OF MULTIPLE FORMS OF DEFINITION
To be useful, the definitions of the knowledge types and sublypes and the
process categories and specific cognitive processes must be understood c1early
and precisely. Since multiple kinds of definition tend ID contribute lo greater
underslanding, we presenl four definitional forms in Ihe chaplers that follow:
verbal descriptions, sample objectives, sample assessment lasks, and sample
instructional activities.
VERBAL DESCRIPTIONS
Verbal descriptions are similar to good dictionary definitions. Furlhermore,
"the exact phrasing of these definitions has been the subject of much debate
among us and while the present definitions are far from ideal, every effort has
been made to describe the major aspects of each category as carefully as possi-
ble" (Handbook, p. 44). That stalemenl made by the original group applies to
this volurne as well. The verbal descriptions are given in Chapters 4 and 5.
Chapler 3 The Taxonomy Table 37
SAMPLE OBJECTIVES
Sample objectives provide a second means of underslanding Ihe eategories.
The sources of the sample objectives are atlribuled where they appear. Sorne
were taken from publicly avaHable slatements, Iike those of Goals 2000 and of
the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, because they typify objec-
tives of interest and concern to many teachers at presenl. Teachers' editions of
textbooks, test publishers' manuals, and vignettes prepared by teachers (see
Section I1I) wer.e additional sourees.
SAMPLE ASSESSMENT TASKS
The sample assessment tasks in Chapter 5 and the assessments in the vignelles
provide yet another means of understanding the categories in our framework.
The tasks were chosen to ilIuslrate sorne ways of assessing combinations of
knowledge and cognitive processes. Sorne people consider the means used to
assess learning as the "real" goals of inslruction because, regandless of fancy
statements, the concrete representation of objectives in tests and other assess-
ments often delermines what students study as well as how they study il.
SAMPLE INSTRUCTlONAL ACTIVITIES
The ilIustrative inslructional activities in the vignelles offer our fourth and fi-
nal way of understanding the categories of the framework. These vignelles
provide additional examples of both knowledge and cognitive processes and,
perhaps more important, Iheir interplay. In addition to aiding in the under-
standing of the categories, the vignettes are designed to make the Taxonomy
Table more useful and usable for teachers, teacher educators, curriculum de-
velopers, assessment speciaJists, and educational administrators.
CLOSING COMMENT: A Loo K AHEAD
Having examined the classification of objectives in the Taxonomy Table, we
now turn lo a delailed examination of the two dimensions that make up Ihe
lable: knowledge and cognitive process. The four types of knowledge logether
with their subtypes are described in Chapter 4. The six major cognitive process
eategories and the 19 cognitive processes that help define them are described
in Chapler 5.
CHAPTER 4
The Knowledge Dimension
Current conceptions of learning focus on the active, cognitive, and constructive
processes involved in rneaningfullearning. Learners are assumed to be active
agents in lheir own learning; lhey select lhe information lo which lhey will at-
tend and construct lheir own meaning from this selected information. Learners
are not passive recipients, nor are they simple recorders oi information pro-
vided to them by parents, teachers, textbooks, or media. This move away from
passive views of learning toward more cognitive and construclivist perspec-
tives emphasizes what leamers know (knowledge) and how they think (cog-
nitive processes) about what lhey know as lhey actively engage in meaningful
learning.
In instructional settings, learners are assumed to construct their own
meaning based on lheir prior knowledge, lheir current cognitive and metacog-
nitive activity, and the opportunities and constrainls they are afforded in the
setting, including the information !hat is available to them. Learners come into
any instructional setting wilh a broad array of knowledge, lheir own goals, and
prior experiences in lhat setting, and they use all of these to "make sense" of
lhe information lhey encounter. This constructivist process of "making sense"
involves lhe activation of prior knowledge as well as various cognitive proc-
esses lhat operate on !hat knowledge.
It is important to keep in mind lhat students can and often do use the in-
formation available to lhem to construct meanings lhat do not coincide wilh
aulhentic aspects of reality or wilh weU-accepted, normative conceptions of lhe
information: In fact, much of lhe literature on conceptual change and student
learning is concerned wilh how students come to construct conceptions of
everyday phenomena, such as heat, temperature, and gravity, that do not
match lhe commonly accepted scientific knowledge and models of these phe-
nomena. Of course, there are difierent slances to take on these "personal" con-
ceptions, unaive" conceptions, or "misconceptions." In OUI opinion, educators
should guide students toward lhe aulhentic and normative conceptions lhal re-
flect lhe most commonly accepted and best current knowledge and thinking in
lhe academic disciplines and subject matter areas.
Accordingly, we are fully aware lhat sludents and teachers construct their
own meanings from instructional activities and classroom events and that lheir
38
Chapter 4 The Knowledge Dimension 39
own conslructions of lhe subject maller conlenl rnay differ from authentic or
normative conceptions. Neverlheless, adopling this cognitive and construc-
tivisl perspective does not imply !hal lhere is no knowledge worth learning or
lhat all knowledge is of equal worth. Teachers can, do, and should make deci-
sions aboul whal is worth leaching in lheir classrooms. As we pointed out in
Chaplers 1 and 2, a key question concerns whal students should learn in
school. Educational objectives offer teachers sorne guidance as lhey lry to de-
termine what lo teach.
The four types of knowledge described in lhis chapter can help educators
distinguish what to teach. They are designed lo reflecl lhe intermediate level of
specificity associaled wilh educational objectives. As such, lheir level of gener-
ality allows lhem to be applied to all grade levels and subject matters. Of
course, sorne grade levels or subject matters may be more likely to have a
grealer number of objectives lhat can be classified as, say, Conceptual knowledge.
This is most likely a function of lhe content of lhe subject matter, beliefs about
students and lhe way they learn, the way in which lhe subject matter is viewed
by lhe leacher, or sorne combination of lhese factors. Nonelheless, we argue
lhat the four types of knowledge included in our framework are useful for
thinking about teaching in a wide variety of subject matters as weU as at differ-
entgrade levels.
A DISTINCTION BETWEEN KNOWLEDGE AND SUBJECT
MATTER CONTENT: A TALE OF FOUR TEACHERS
We begin by illustrating lhe important distinction between knowledge and
content made on pages 12-13. The example involves four teachers-Mrs. Pat-
terson, Ms. Chang, Mr. Jefferson, and Mrs. Weinberg-and their educational
objectives for a unit on Macbeth. Each has a differenl perspective on what stu-
dents should learn during lhe unit. Of course, all four teachers have multiple
educational objectives, but lhe example highlights how lhese teachers focus on
objectives lhat reflect different types of knowledge.
Mrs. Patterson believes that her students should know lhe names of the
characters in lhe play and lhe readily apparent relationships among them (e.g.,
Macbelh and MacDuff were enemies). Students should know lhe details of the
plot, and they should know which characters said what, even to lhe point !hat
lhey can recite certain important passages from memory. Because Mrs. Patter-
son facuses on lhe specific details and elements of Macbeth, in the language of
lhe Taxonomy Table she seems to be concerned with Factual knowledge.
Ms. Chang believes !hat Macbeth enables students to learn about important
concepts such as ambition,tragic hero, and irony. She also is interested in hav-
ing her sludents know how lhese ideas are related to one anolher. For example,
what role does ambition play in lhe developmenl of a tragic hero? Ms. Chang
believes lhat a focus on these ideas and lheir relationships makes Macbeth come
alive lo her students by aliowing lhem to make connections between lhe actual
play and these different concepls lhat can be applied lo understanding the
40 Section U The Revised Taxonomy Structure
eh.pler 4 Ihe Knowledge Dimension 41
human condition. In terms of the Taxonorny Table, she is concemed with Con-
ceptual knowledge.
Mr. Jefferson believes that Macbeth is but one of many plays that could be
included in the English literature curriculum. His goal is to use Macbeth as a ve-
hicle for teaching students how to think about plays in general. Toward this
end, he has developed a general approach that he wants students to use as they
read a play. The approach begins by having the class cliscuss the plot, then ex-
amine the relationships among the eharacters, fuen discem fue messages being
conveyed by fue playwright, and finaUy consider fue way fue play was written
and its cultural context. Given that fuese four general steps make up a proce-
dure fuat can be applied to all plays, notjust Macbeth, Mr. Jefferson seems to be
focused on applying Procedural knowledge, in the language of the Taxonomy
Table.
Like Mr. Jefferson, Mrs. Weinberg sees Macbeth as one of many plays that
students will encounter in high sehool as well as beyond. She also wants her
students to leam a set of general procedures or "tools" they can use to study,
understand, analyze, and appreciate ofuer plays. However, Mrs. Weinberg is
also concemed that students do not just apply or use these tools in a rote or
meehanical faslUon. She wants her students to "think about what they are do-
ing as they do it," to be self-reflective and metacognitive about how they are
using these tools. For example, she wants them to note any problerns they
have in using fue procedures (e.g., confusing plot with eharacter development)
and leam from these problems. FinaUy, she hopes that students will leam
something about fuemselves, perhaps their own ambitions or their own
strengths and weaknesses, by identifying with the characters in fue play. In the
language of the Taxonomy Table, Mrs. Weinberg is concemed wifu Metacogni-
tive knowledge.
In aH four examples the content of the play is the same. However, the four
teachers use this content in different ways to focus on varied objectives that
emphasize different types of knowledge. AH subject rnatters are composed of
specific content, but how this content is structured by teachers in terms of fueir
objectives and instructional activities results in different types of knowledge
being emphasized in fue unit. Accordingly, how teachers set fueir educalional
objectives, organize their instruction to meet these objectives, and even assess
student learning of fue objectives results in different outcomes, even when the
content is ostensibly fue same.
DIFFERENT TYPES OF KNOWLEDGE
The problem of how to eharacterize knowledge and how individuals represent
knowledge is a classic and enduring question in philosophy and psyehology. It
is weH beyond the scope of fuis chapter to survey all the different philosoplUcal
positions and psychological fueories and models ofknowledge. Our general per-
spective is informed by current perspectives in cognitive science and cognitive
psyehology on knowledge representation. We do not adhere to a simple behav-
iorist view fuat knowledge is best represented as an accumulation of associations
between stimuJi and responses (alfuough sorne surely is) or merely a quantitative
increase in bits of information (a haUmark of fue empiricist tradition-see Case,
1998; Keil, 1998). Rafuer, our perspective reflects the idea that knowledge is orga-
nized and structured by the leamer in line with a rationalist-constructivist tradi-
tion. Reflecting recent cognitive and developmental psychological researeh (e.g.,
Case, 1998), however, we also do not adhere to fue idea that knowledge is orga-
nized in "stages" or in system-wide logical structures as in traditional develop·
mental stage models of thinking (e.g., Piagetian rnodels).
Based on cognitive science research on the development of expertise, ex-
pert thinking, and problern solving, our perspective is that knowledge is do-
main specific and contextualized. Our understanding of knowledge should
reflect this dornain specificity and fue role that social experiences and context
play in the construction and developrnent of knowledge (Bereiter and Sear-
damalia, 1998; Bransford, Brown, and Cocking, 1999; Case, 1998; Keil, 1998;
Mandler, 1998; Wellrnan and Gelman, 1998).
There are many different types of knowledge and seerningly even more
terrns used to describe fuem. In alphabetical order, sorne of fue terms are: con-
ceptual knowledge, conditional knowledge, content knowledge, declarative
knowledge, disciplinary knowledge, discourse knowledge, dornain knowledge,
episodic knowledge, explicit knowledge, factual knowledge, met.cognitive
knowledge, prior knowledge, procedural knowledge, semantic knowledge, sit-
uational knowledge, sociocultural knowledge, strategic knowledge, and tacit
knowledge (see, for example, A1exande~ , $challert, and Hare, 1991; deJong and
Ferguson-Hessler, 1996; Dochy and Alexander, 1995; Ryle, 1949).
Sorne of the different terms signify important differences among the vari-
eties of knowledge, whereas ofuers are apparently just different labels for the
same knowledge category. Later in this chapter we point out fuat fue distinction
between "important differences" and "difierent labels" is central to the different
types and subtypes of knowledge in fue revised Taxonomy. Given the many dif-
ferent terms and the Iack of agreement about the many aspects of fue knowledge
dimension, it is a difficult task to develop a taxonomy of knowledge fuat cap-
tures the complexity and comprehensiveness of our knowledge base while be-
ing relatively simple, practical, and easy to use, as well as maintaining sorne par-
simony in the number of categories. In considering these multiple constraints,
we arrived at our four general types ofknowledge: (1) Factual Knowledge, (2) Con-
ceptual Knowledge, (3) Procedural Know/edge, and (4) Metacognitive Know/edge.
In the next major section of this ehapter we define aD four types of knowl-
edge along wifu fueir associated subtypes. First, however, we give our reasons
for including bofu factual and conceptual knowledge and for including
metacognitive knowledge.
A DISTINCTION BETWEEN FACTUAL. AND CONCEPTUAL. KNOWL.EDGE
In cognitive psychology, declarative knowledge is usually defined in terms of
"knowing lhat": knowing that Bogota is fue capital of Colombia, or knowing that
a square is a two-dimensional figure with four perpendicular sides of equal
42 Section D The Revise<! Taxonorny Structure
Chapter 4 The Knowledge Dimension 43
length. This knowledge can be (1) specific content elements sueh as terms and
faets or (2) more general eoneepts, principIes, models, or theories (Alexander,
Sehallert, and Hare, 1991; Anderson, 1983; deJong and Ferguson-Hessler, 1996;
Doehy and Alexander, 1995). In the revised Taxonomy, we wanted to distin-
guish knowledge of discrete, isolated eontent elements (Le., terrns and facts)
from knowledge of larger, more organized bodies of knowledge (Le., coneepts,
principIes, madels, or theories).
This differentiation parallels a general dislinetion in eognitive psychology
between the knowledge of "bits of information" and more general "mental
models," "sehemas," or "theories" (implicit or explicit) that individuals may
use to help them organize a body of information in an interconnected, non-
arbitrary, and systematic manner. Aeeordingly, we have reserved the term
Factual Knowledge for the knowledge oí discrete, isolated "bits of information"
and the term Conceptual KnolOledge for more eomplex, organized knowledge
forms. We think this is an important dislinetion íor teachers and other educa-
tors to make.
Moreover, research has shown that many students do not make the
important eonnections between and among the facts they leam in dass-
rooms and the larger system oí ideas reflected in an expert's knowledge of a
discipline. Although developing expertise in an aeademic discipline and dis-
ciplinary ways of thinking is eertainly an important goal of education,
students ofien do not even leam to transfer or apply the faets and ideas they
leam in elassrooms to understanding their experiences in the everyday world.
This is oHen labeled the problem oí "inert" knowledge; that is, students ofien
seem to acquire a great deal of factual knowledge, but they do not understand
it at a deeper level or integrate or systematically organize it in disciplinary or
useful ways (Bereiter and Scardamalia, 1998; Bransford, Brown, and Cocking,
1999).
One of the hallmarks of experts is that not only do they know a lot about
lheir discipline, but also lheir knowledge is organized and reflects a deep un-
derstanding of the subject malter. In combination, Conceptual knowledge and
deep understanding can help individuals as they altempt to transfer what lhey
have leamed to new situations, lhereby overcoming sorne of lhe problems of
inert knowledge (Bransford, Brown, and Cocking, 1999).
Accordingly, on bolh empirical and practical grounds, we distinguish be-
tween Factual knolOledge and Conceptual knowledge. Tne distinction may not be
appropriate in terrns of formal psychological madels oí knowledge representa-
tion (e.g., propositional network models or connectionist models), but we do
think it has meaning for classroom instruetion and assessment. Educational ob-
jectives can focus both the teacher and students on acquiring small bits and
pieces of knowledge without concem for how lhey "fit" within a larger disd-
plinary or more systematic perspective. By separating Factual knowledge from
Conceptual knolOledge, we highlight lhe need for educators to tea eh for deep un-
derstanding of Conceptual knowledge, not just for remembering isolated and
small bits of Factual knowledge.
A RATIONALE FOR METACOGNITIVE KNOWLEDGE
Our indusion oí Metacognitive knowledge reflects recent researeh on how stu-
dents' knowledge about their own cognition and control of lheir own cogni-
tion play an important role in learning (Bransford, Brown, and Coeking, 1999;
Stemberg, 1985; Zimmerman and Schunk, 1998). Although behaviorist psy-
chology models generally exeluded ideas such as consdousness, awareness,
self-reflection, seH-regulation, and thinking about and controlling one's own
thinking and learning, current cognitive and sodal constructivist models of
leaming emphasize the importance of these activities. Beeause these activities
foeus on cognition itseH, the prefix meta is added to refleet the idea that
. metacognition is about ar I/above" or "transcendsu cognition. Social construc-
tivist models also stress self-reflective aetivity as an important aspeet of leam-
ing. In this case, bolh cognitive and social eonstruetivist madels agree about
lhe importance of íaeilitating students' thinking about their own thinking.
Aeeordingly, we have added this new category to lhe Taxonomy to refleet cur-
rent researeh and theory on the importance of metacognitive knowledge in
learning.
The term metacognition has been used in many different ways, but an im-
portant general distinetion cancems two aspeets of metaeognition: (1) koowl-
edge about cognition and (2) control, monitoring, and regulation of cog-
nitive procesaes. The lalter is also caUed metacognitive control and regulation
as well as more generally, self-regulation (~oekaerts, Pintrich, and Zeidner,
2000; Bransford, Brown, and Cocking, 1999; Brown, Bransford, Ferrara, and
Campione, 1983; Pintrich, Wolters, and Baxter, in press; Zimmerman and
Schunk, 1998). This basic dislinction between metaeognitive knowledge
and metaeognitive control or self-regulation parallels the two dimensions in
our Taxonomy Table. Aeeordingly, we have lirnited Metacognitive know/edge to
knowledge about cognition. The aspeet of metaeognition that involves
metacognitive control and self-regulation reflects different types of eognitive
pracesses and lhereIore fits into lhe cognitive pracess dimension, which is dis-
eussed in Chapler 5.
Metacognitive knowledge ineludes knowledge of general strategies that may
be used for difIerent tasks, lhe conditions under whieh lhese strategies may be
used, the extent lo which the strategies are effective, a':ld seH-knowledge
(Bransford, Brown, and Cocking, 1999; F1avell, 1979; PintricH, Wolters, and Bax-
ter, in press; Schneider and Pressley, 1997). For example, leamers can know
about different strategies for reading a ehapter in a textbook and also about
strategies to monitor and check their comprehension as lhey read. Leamers
also activate relevant knowledge about lheir own strengths and weaknesses on
the reading assignment as well as their motivation for completing the assign-
men!. For example, students may reaJize lhat they already know a fair amount
abaut lhe topic of lhe chapter in the textbook and lhat they are interested in lhe
topic. This Metacognitive knowledge could lead lhem to change lheir approach to
lhe task by adjusling lheir speed or using an entirely different approach.
44 Section n The Revised Taxonorny Structure
Leamers also can activa te Ihe relevant situational, conditional, or cultural
knowledge ior solving a problem in a certain context (e.g., in fuis dassroom; on
fhistype oi test, in fuis type of situation;-lñihissubcuJture). For example, they
may know that Ihe teacher uses only muJtiple-choice tests. Furthermore, Ihey
know Ihat muJtiple-choice tests require only recogrution of the correet answers,
not actual reca1l of Ihe information as in essay tests. This Metacognitive knowl-
edge might influence how they prepare for the tes!.
During Ihe meetings that led to Ihe preparation of Ihis revised Taxonomy,
we dlscussed frequently and in great detail both the indusion and proper
placem.ent of Metacognitive knowledge. Our indusion of Metacognitive knowledge
IS predl~ated on our belief Ihat it is extremely important in understanding and
facilitating learrung, a belief !hat is consistent wilh the basic precepts of cogru-
tive psychology and supported by empirical research (Bransford, Brown, and
Cocking, 1999). Just as Ihe original Taxonomy raised ¡he possibility of teaching
for "higher-order" objectives, our revised iramework points to the possibility
of teaching for Metacognitive knowledge as we1l as self-reguJation.
.. 1n terms of proper placemen!, we debated several issues. Should Metacog-
mtzve knowledge be a separate dimension, thus producing a three-dimensional
figure? ShouJd the focus of Metacognitive knowledge be on metacognitive
processes and self-reguJation rather !han knowledge and, if so, wouJdn't it be
better placed along the Cognitive Process dimension of the Taxonomy Table?
Doesn't Metacognitive knowledge overlap with Factual, Conceptual, and Proce-
dural knowledge and, if so, isn't it redundant? These are legitimate questions we
grappled wilh for a long time.
We ch~se to place Metacognitive knowledge as a fourlh knowledge category
foro two pnmary reasons. First, metacognitive control and self-regulation re-
qUlre the use of Ihe cogrutive processes induded on Ihe olher dimension of Ihe
Taxonomy Table. Metacogrutive control and self-regulation involve processes
such as Re."'.ember, Understand, Apply, Analyze, Evaluate, and Create. Thus, adding
metacogrulIve control and self-regulation processes to the cognitive process di-
menSlOn was seen as redundant. Second, Factual, Conceptual, and Procedural
knowledge as conceived in Ihe original Taxonomy pertain to subject malter con-
ten!. In contrast, Metacognitive knowledge is knowledge of cognition and about
oneself in relation to various subject matters, either individually or c01lectively
(e.g., a1l sclences, acadernic subjects in general).
Of COUISe, Metacognitive knowledge does not have the same status as the
other Ihree types of knowledge. We noted earlier Ihat Ihese types of knowledge
were de.veloped through consensus within a scientific or disciplinary commu-
mty. This 18 dearly not the case with self-knowledge (De), which is based on an
individual's own self-awareness and knowledge base. Strategic knowledge (Da)
and knowledge about cognitive tasks (Db) have been developed within different
communities. For example, cogrutive psychology has developed a weallh of in-
formation.on Ihe usefuJness of different cogrutive strategies for memory, leam-
mg, thmking, and problem solving. When students come to know and under-
stand metacogrutive knowledge about strategies Ihat is based on scientific
research, they may be better prepared than when they rely on their own idio-
syncratic strategies for learning.
Chapler 4 The Knowledge Dimension 415
CATEGORIES OF THE KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION
Four types of knowledge are listed in Table 4.1. The first three categories of our
revised framework indude a1l Ihe knowledge categories from Ihe original Tax-
onomy (see Appendix B). Some of the labels are different, however, and some
of the original subtypes are collapsed into more general categories. Moreover,
reflecting Ihe prescient nature oi the original Handbook, much of Ihe textand
many of Ihe examples in the sections that folIow are taken from the original
Handbook. Finally, as we mentioned earlier, the fourlh category, Metacognitive
knowledge, and its subtypes are all new.
A. FACTUAL KNOWLEDGE
Factual knowledge encompasses the basic elements that experts use in commu-
nicating about their academic discipline, understanding it, and organizing it
systematically. These elements are usuaHy serviceable to people who work in
Ihe discipline in the very form in which Ihey are presented; they need little or
no alteration from one use or application to anolher. Factual knowledge contains
the basic elements students must know if they are to be acquainted wilh Ihe
discipline or to solve any of Ihe problems in il. The elements are usually symbols
associated with some concrete referents, or "strings of symbols" Ihat convey
important infonnation. For Ihe most par!, Factual knowledge exists at a relatively
low level of abstraction.
Because Ihere is a tremendous weallh oi Ihese basic elements, it is almost
inconceivable Ihat a student could learn aH of Ihem relevant to a particular sub-
ject matter. As our knowledge increases in Ihe social sciences, sciences, and hu-
manities, even experts in these fields have difficulty keeping up with a1l the
new elemenls. Consequently, some selection for educational purposes is almost
always required. For dassification purposes, Factual knowledge may be distin-
guished from Conceptual knowledge by virtue of its very specificily; Ihat is, Fac-
tual knowledge can be isolated as elements or bits of information Ihat are be-
lieved lo have some value in and of themselves. The two sublypes of Factual
knowledge are knowledge of terminology (Aa) and knowledge of specific details and
elements (Ab).
AA. KNOWLEDGE OF TERMINOLOGY
Knowledge of terminology includes knowledge of specific verbal and nonverballa-
beis and symbols (e.g., words, numerals, signs, pictures). Each subject malter con-
lains a large number of labels and symbols, bolh verbal and nonverbal,!hal have
particular referents. They are Ihe basic language of Ihe discipline-Ihe shorlhand
used by experts to express what Ihey know. In any altempt by experts to commu-
nicate wilh olhers about phenomena within Iheir discipline, Ihey find it neces-
sary to use Ihe special labels and symbols Ihey have devised. In many cases it is
impossible for experts to discuss problerns in Iheir discipline wilhout making use
of essential terms. Quite literally, Ihey are unable to even think about many of Ihe
phenomena in Ihe discipline unIess Ihey use these labels and symbols.
4.1 THE KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION
MAJOR TVPES AND SUBTVPES EXAMPLES
A. FACTUAL KNOWLEOGE-1'he basic elemcnts students mU&t know lo be acquainted with a
discipline or solve problems in it
AA. Knowledge of terminology Technieal vocabulary, musical symbols
Aa. Knowledge of specifie details and Major natural resources, reliable sourees of
elements information
11. CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDtlE-The interrelationships among!:he bask eJementll within a larger
structure that enable them to function toge!:her
BA. Knowledge of dassifieations and eategories ownership
Ba. Knowledge of principies and generalizations
Bc. Knowledge of theories, models, and struetures
Periods of geologieal time, forms of business
Pythagorean theorem, law of supply and demand
Theory of evolution, strueture of Congress
c. PROCEDURAL KNowU:DG.E-How lo do something, mt>thods of inquiry, and criteria for using
skills, a1gorithms, tedmiques, and methods
CA. Knowledge of subject-specifie skills and Skills used in painting with watercolors,
algorithms whole-number division algorithrn
Ca. Knowledge of subjeet-speeifie techniques Interviewing teehniques, seientifie method
andmethods
Cc. Knowledge of eriteria for determining when lo use appropriate procedures Criteria used lo delermine when lo applya
procedure involving Newton's second law, criteria
used to judge the feasibility of using a particular
method to estimate business eosts
D. METACOGNITIVE KNOWU:DGE-Knowledge of cognitioo in general as well as awareness and
know1edge of one's own cognition
DA. Strategie knowledge Knowledge of outlining as a means of eapturing
the structure of a unit of subject matter in a text-
book, know1edge of the use of heuristies
Da. Knowledge about eognitive lasks, Know ledge of the types of tests particular teaehers
induding appropriate eontextual and administer, knowledge of the eognitive demands
eonditional knowledge of different tasks
Oc. Self-knowledge Knowledge that eritiquing essays is a personal
strength, whereas writing essays is a personal
weakness; awareness of one's own knowledge
leve!
Chapter 4 The Knowledge Dimension 47
The novice leamer must be eognizant of fuese labels and symbols and
leam the generally aeeepted referents that are attaehed to them. As the expert
must eommunieate with these terms, so must fuose leaming the discipline
have a knowledge of the terms and their referents as they attemp! to eompre-
hend or think abou! the phenomena of the discipline.
Here, to a greater extent than in any other eategory of knowledge, ex-
perts find their own labels and symbols so useful and precise that fuey are
likely to want fue leamer to know more than fue leamer really needs to know
or can leam. This may-be espeeially true in the scienees, where attempts are
made to use labels and symbols wifu great precision. Seientists find it diffi-
eull to express ideas or diseuss particular phenomena with fue use of other
symbols or with "popular" or "folk knowledge" terms mOre familiar to a lay
popula tion.
EXAMPLES OF KNOWLEDGE OF TERMINOLOGY
• Knowl~dge of fue alphabet
• Knowledge of scientifie terms (e.g., labels for parts of a eell, narnes for sub-
atorrUe partides)
• Knowledge of the vocabulary of painting
• Knowledge of important aeeounting terms
• Knowledge of the standard representational symbols on maps and charts
• Knowledge of fue symbols used to indicate fue eorreet pronunciation of
words
AB. KNOWLEDGE OF SPECIFIC DETAILS AND ELEMENTS
Knowledge of specific delails and elemenls refers to knowledge of events, loca-
tions, people, dates, sourees of information, and fue like. It may indude very
precise and specifie information, sueh 'as the exact date of an event or the ex-
aet magnitude of a phenomenon. It may also indude approximate informa-
tion, sueh as a time period in whieh an event oeeurred or fue general order of
magnitude of a phenomenon. Speeific faets are those that can be isolated as
separate, diserete e1ements in eontrast to those fuat can be known only in a
1arger eontext.
Every subjeet matter eontains sorne events, locations, people, dates, and
other details fuat experts know and believe to represent important knowledge
about the field. Such specific faets are basic information that experts use in de-
scribing their field and in thinking about speeifie problems or topies in the
field. These faels can be distinguished from terminology, in that terminology
generally represents the conventions or agreements within a field (Le., a com-
mon language), whereas faels represent findings arrived at by means other
fuan consensual agreements made for purposes of eornmunieation. Subtype
Ab also indudes knowledge about particular books, writings, and other
48 Section II The Revised Taxonomy Structure
sourees of information on specifie topics and problems. Thus, knowledge of
a specific faet and knowledge of the SOurees of Ihe faet are c1assified in this
subtype.
Again, the tremendous number of specifie faets forees edueators (e.g., eur-
rieulum speeialists, textbook authors, teaehers) to make ehoices about what is
basie and what is of secondary importance or of importanee primarily to Ihe
expert. Edueators must also eonsider the level of precision wilh whieh difier-
ent facts must be known. Frequently edueators may be eontent to have a stu-
dent leam only Ihe approximate magnitude of the phenomenon ralher Ihan its
precise quantity or to leam an approximate time period ralher Ihan the precise
date or time of a speeifie event. Edueators have considerable diffieuIty deter-
mining whether many of the specifie faets are sueh that students should leam
Ihem as part of an educational unit or eourse, or Ihey can be left to be aequired
whenever Ihey really need Ihem.
EXAMPLES OF KNOWLEDGE OF SPECIFIC DETAILS AND ELEMENTS
• Knowledge of major faets about particular cultures and societies
• Knowledge of praetieal faets important to heallh, citizenship, and olher
human needs and eoneerns
• Knowledge of Ihe more signifieant names, plaees, and events in the news
• Knowledge of fue reputation of a given aufuor for presenting and inter-
preting faets on governmental problems
• Knowledge of major products and exports of eountries
• Knowledge of reliable sourees of information for wise purchasing
B. CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE
Conceptual knowledge indudes knowledge of eategories and dassifications and
the relationships between and among fuem-more complex, organized knowl-
edge forms. Conceptual knowledge indudes schemas, mental models, or implicit
or explieit theories in different cognitive psychological models. These sehemas,
models, and theories represent the knowledge an individual has about how a
particular subjeet matler is organized and struetured, how the different parts
or bits of information are intereonneeted and interrelated in a more systematie
manner, and how Ihese parts function together. For example, a mental model
for why Ihe seasons occur may indude ideas about Ihe earth, Ihe sun, Ihe rota-
tion of the earth around Ihe sun, and the tilt of the earth toward Ihe sun at dif-
ferent times during Ihe year. These are not just simple, isolated facts about the
earth and sun but ralher ideas about fue relationships between them and how
Ihey are linked to fue ~~,,: sonal ehanges. This type of conceptual knowledge
mlght be one aspect of what is termed "disciplinary knowledge," or the way
experts in Ihe discipline Ihink about a phenomenon-in this case Ihe scientifie
explanation for Ihe Oecurrence of the seasons.
Chapler 4 The Knowledge Dimension 49
Conceptual knowledge indudes three subtypes: knowledge of classifications and
categories (Ba), knowledge ofprinciples and generalizations (Bb), and knowledge of
theories, models, and slructures (Be). Classifieations and eategories form Ihe basis
for principies and generalizations. These, in tum, form the basis for Iheories,
models, and struetures. The three subtypes should capture a great deal of Ihe
knowledge!hat is generated within aH Ihe different disciplines.
BA. KNOWLEDGE OF CLASSIFICATIONS AND CATEGORIES
Subtype Ba indudes Ihe speeifie categories, elasses, divisions, and arrangements
that are used in different subject matters.As a subject matler develops, individu-
als who work on it find it advantageous to develop elassifieations and eategories
that Ihey can use to structure and systematize Ihe phenomena. This type of
knowledge is somewhat more general and often more abstract !han Ihe knowl-
edge of terminology and specifie facts. Eaeh subject matter has a set of categories
that are used to diseover new elements as well as to deal with Ihem once they
are diseovered. Classifieations and eategories differ from terminology and facts
in !hat Ihey form Ihe eonnecting links between and among specifie elements.
When one is writing or analyzing a story, for example, Ihe major eategories
indude plot, eharacter, and setting. Note!hat plot as a category is substantiaHy
different from Ihe plot of Ihis story. When Ihe eoneem is plot as a eategory, the
key question is What makes a plot a plot? The category "plot" is defined by
what aH specifie plots have in eommon. In contrast,·when the eoneem is the
plot of a particular story, Ihe key question is What is Ihe plot of this story?-
knowledge of specific details and elements (Ab).
Sometimes it is diffieult to distinguish knowledge of classifications and cate-
gories (Ba) from Factual knowledge (A). To eomplieate matters furlher, basie
classifieations and eategories can be plaeed into larger, more eomprehenslve
classifications and eategories. In malhematies, for example, whole numbers,
integers, and fraetions ean be plaeed inlo Ihe calegory rational numbers. Eaeh
larger eategory moves us away from Ihe concrete specifies and into Ihe realm
of Ihe abstracto
For the purposes of our Taxonomy, several charaeteristies are useful in dis-
tinguishing the subtypes of knowledge. Classifications and eategories are
largely the result of agreement and eonvenienee, whereas knowledge of spe-
cifie details stems more directiy from observation, experimentation, and dis-
covery. Knowledge of classifications and categories is eommonly a reflection of how
experts in the field think and altack problems, whereas knowledge of whieh
specifie details beeome importantis derived from the results of sueh thought
and problem solving.
Knowledge of classifications and categories is an important aspeet of develop-
ing expertise in an aeademic discipline. Proper classifieation of information
and experienee into appropriate eategories is a classie sign of learning and
development. Moreover, recent eognitive researeh on conceptual change
and understanding suggests that student leatning can be eonstrained by
50 Section 11 The Revised Taxonom y Structure
Chapler 4 The Knowledge Dimension 51
mi~classification of information into inappropriate eategories. For example,
Chl and her eolleagues (see Chi, 1992; Chi, Slotta, and deLeeuw, 1994; Slotta,
Chi, and loram, 1995) suggest that students may have difficulty understand-
mg basle SClenee coneepts sueh as heat, light, force, and electricity when they
classlfy these eoneepts as material substanees rather than as proeesses. Once
concepts are classified as substances or objects, students invoke a whole
range of eharaeteristics and properties of "objects." As a result, students try to
apply these object-like characteristics to what are better described in scientific
terms as processes. The naive categorization of these eoncepts as substances
does not match the more seientifically aecurate categorization of them as
processes.
The categorization of heat, light, force, and electricity as substances
becomes the basis for an implicit theory of how these processes are supposed
to operate and leads to systematic misconceptions about the nature of the
processes. This implicit theory, in tum, makes it difficult for students to
develop the appropriate seientific understanding. Aecordingly, learning the
approp,~iate classification and category system can renect a "conceptual
change "."d result m a ~ore appropnate understanding of the coneepts than
just learrung the" deÍlruhons (as would be the case in the Factual knawledge
category).
For several reasons, it seems likely that students will have greater diffi-
culty learrung knowledge of c/assifications and categories than Factual knowledge.
Flrst~ rnany o~ the classifications and categories students eneounter represent
relahvely arbltrary and even artificial forms of knowledge that are meaning-
fuI only to experts who reeognize their value as tools and techniques in their
work Second, students may be able to operate in their daily life without
knowmg the appropriate subject matter elassifications and categories to the
lev~l of precIslon expect~ by experts in lhe field. Third, knowledge of c/assifi-
catlOns and categOrt~s reqUlfes lhat students make connections among specific
eontent .. lements (1.~., termmology and facts). Finally, as c1assifications and
~ategones are combmed to form larger c1assifications and categories, leam-
mg becom~s more abstraet. Nevertheless, the studenl is expected lo know
these classlÍlcahons and calegories and lo know when Ihey are appropriale
or useful .In dealing wilh subject matter conlent. As Ihe student begins
lo work wllh a sub)ecl matter wllhm an academic discipline and leams how
lo use Ihe tools, the value of these elassifications and calegories becomes
apparent.
BB. KNOWL.:EOGE OF PRINCIPLE5 ANO GENERALIZATIONS
As mentioned earJier, principIes and generalizalions are composed of dassifi-
eations and calegories. PrincipIes and generalizations lend lO dominale an aca-
demic discipline and are used to sludy phenomena or solve problems in the
discipline. One of the hallmarks of a subject matter expert is lhe ability to rec-
ognize meaningful patterns (e.g., generalizalions) and activate the relevant
knowledge of lhese patterns with Jittle cognitive effort (Bransford, Brown, and
Cocking, 1999).
Subtype Bb ineludes knowledge of particular abstractians that summarize
observations of phenomena. These abstractions have the greatesl value in de_
, s~~ing, l)fe~~e~g, e~l?l~~g, or d"t~,:,,-, jl)!v,g fue.InQs.Upprop;:iate <U\d. rele,
-
.Yª,.I!!" .elion or a~ction t~ be taken. PrincipIes and generalizations bring
togelher large numbers of specific facts and events, d~J)J! the proeesses and
interrelationships among fuese specifie details (thus forming classifieations
and eategories), and, furthermore, describe fue proeesses and inlerrelation-
ships among the classifications and eategories. In this way, they enable fue
expert to begin lo organize Ihe whole in a parsimonious and coherent manner.
Principies and generalizalions lend lo be broad ideas lhat may be difficult
for sludenls lo undersland because sludents may nol be Ihoroughly ae-
quainted with lhe phenomena fuey are intended to summarize and organize. If
students do get to know fue principies and generalizations, however, lhey have
a means for relating and organizing a greal deal of subject malter. As a result,
fuey should have more insighl into lhe subject maller as well as better memory
of il.
EXAMPLES OF KNOWLEDGE OF PRINCIPLES AND GENERALIZATIONS
• Knowledge of major generalizalions about particular cullures
• Knowledge of fue fImdamenlallaws of physics
• Knowledge of the principies of chemistry that are relevant to life proeesses
and health
• Knowledge of Ihe implieations of American foreign trade policies for lhe
inlernational economy and inlernational good will
• Knowledge of Ihe major principies involved in learning
• Knowledge of Ihe principies of federalism
• Knowledge of the principIes fuat govem rudirnentary arithmelic opera-
tions (e.g., Ihe commutative principie, lhe associative principie)
EXAMPLES OF KNOWLEDGI!: OF CLASSIFICATIONS AND CATEGORIES
• Knowledge of fue variely of types of literature
• Knowledge of lhe various forms of business ownership
• Knowledge of fue parts of sentenees (e.g., nouns, verbs, adjectives)
• Knowledge of different kinds of psychological problems
• Knowledge of lhe differenl periods of geologic time
Bc. KNOWLEOGE OF THEORIES, MOOEL5, ANO STRUCTURES
!')ubtype Be ineludes knowledge of principies and generalizations togelher
wilh fueir interrelationships lhat present a elear, rounded, and syslemic view
of a complex phenomenon, problem, or subject malter. These are the most ab-
straet formulations. They can show fue inlerrelationships and organization of a
52 Section 1I The Revised Taxonorny Structure
great range of specific details, classifications and categories, and principIes and
generalizations. This subtype, Bc, differs from Bb in its emphasis on a set of
principIes and generalizations related in sorne way to form a theory, model, or
stmcture. The principIes and generalizations in subtype Bb do not need to be
related in any meaningful way.
Subtype Be includes knowledge of Ihe difIerent parad;gms, epistemolo-
gies, theories, and models that <lifferenl disciplines use to describe, under-
sland, explain, and predict phenomena. Disciplines have difIerent paradigms
and epistemologies for structuring inqwry, and students should come to know
these different ways oí conceptualizing and organizing subject matler and ar-
eas oí research within the subject matler. In biology, for example, knowledge oí
the fueory of evolution and how to thin!< in evolutionary terms to explain dif-
ferenl biological phenomena is an important aspect oí this subtype of Concep-
tua/ know/edge. Similarly, behavioral, cogrntive, and social constructivist fueo-
ries in psychology make different epislemological assumptions and reflecl
difíerent perspectives on human behavior. An expert in a discipline knows not
only fue different disciplinary theories, models, and structures but also fueir
relative strengths and weaknesses and can fuin!< "within" one of them as well
as "outside" any of them.
EXAMPLES OF KNOWLEDGE OF THEORIES, MODELS, AND STRUCTURES
• Knowledge of fue interrelationshlps among chernical principIes as fue
basis for chemkal fueories
• Knowledge of the overall structure of Congress (i.e., organjzation, functions)
• Knowledge of the basic slructural orgaruzation of the local city government
• Knowledge of a relatively complete formulation oí the theory oí evolution
• Knowledge of the theory of plate tectorncs
• Knowledge of genetic models (e.g., DNA)
C. PROCEDURAL KNOWLEDGE
Procedural know/edge is the "knowledge of how" to do something. The "some-
lhing" might range from completing íairIy routine exercises lo solving novel
problems. Procedura/ knlYW/edge often lakes Ihe form of a series or sequence of
sleps to be followed. It includes knowledge oí skills, algorithms, techrnques,
and methods, collectively known as procedures (Alexander, Schallert, and
Hare, 1991; Anderson, 1983; deJong and Ferguson-Hessler, 1996; Dochy and
Alexander, 1995). Procedura/ know/edge also includes knowledge of the criteria
used to determ;ne when lo use various procedures. In fact, as Bransford,
Brown, and Cocking (1999) noted, not only do experts have a great deal of
knowledge about their subject matter, but their knowledge is "condHionalized"
so that fuey know when and where to use il.
Whereas Factual know/edge and Conceptual know/edge represent the "what"
of knowledge, procedural knowledge concerns the "how." In ofuer words, Pro-
cedura/ know/edge reflects knowledge of difIerent "processes," whereas Factua/
Chaplee 4 Th. Knowledge Dimension S3
know/edge and Conceptual know/edge deal with what might be termed "prod-
ucts." lt is important to note fuat Procedural know/edge represents only the
knowledge of fuese procedures; their actual use is discussed in Chapter 5.
In contrast to Metacognitive know/edge (which includes knowledge of more
general strategies that cut across subject matlers or academic disciplines), Pro-
cedura/ know/edge is specific or germane to particular subject matlers or aca-
demic disciplines. Accordingly, we reserve fue terro Procedural know/edge for the
knowledge of skms, algorithms, techruques, and mefuods that are subject spe-
cific or discipline specific. In mathematics, for example, there are algorithms
for perforrning long clivision, solving quadratic equations, and establishing the
congruence of triangles. In science, there are general methods for designing
and performing experiments. In social studies, fuere are procedures for read-
ing maps, estimating the age of physical artifacts, and collecting hlstorical data.
In language arts, there are procedures for spelling words in Enghsh and for
generating grarnmatically correet sentences. Because of fue subjecl-specific na-
ture of these procedures, knowledge of fuem also reflects specific disciplinary
knowledge or specific disciplinary ways of thinking in contrasl to general
strategies for problem solving that can be applied across many clisciplines.
CA. KNOWLEDGE OF SUB.JECT-SPECIFIC SKILLS AND ALGORITHMS
As we mentioned, Procedural knlYWledge can be expressed as a series or sequence
of sleps, collectively known as a procedure. Sometimes fue sleps are followed
in a fixed order; at ofuer times decisions must be made abaut whlch step to per-
form nexl. Similarly, sometimes fue end result is fixed (e.g., fuere is a single
prespecified answer); in ofuer cases it is nol. Alfuough fue process may be ei-
fuer fixed or more open, fue end result is generally considered fixed in this sub-
type of knowledge. A cornmon example is knowledge oí algorithms used wHh
mafuematies exercises. The procedure for multiplymg fractions in arithmetic,
when applied, generally results in a fixed answer (barring computational mis-
takes, of course).
Alfuough fue concem here is wifu Procedural knowledge, the resul! of using
Procedural knowledge is often Factual knowledge or Conceptual knowledge. For
example, the algorithm for fue addition of whole numbers that we use to add
2 and 2 is Procedural know/edge;'fue answer 4 is simply Factua/ knowledge. Once
again, the emphasis here is on fue studen!'s knowledge of the procedure rathe"
fuan on hls or her ability to use il.
EXAMPLES OF KNOWLEDGE OF SUBJECT-SPECIFIC SKILLS
AND ALGORITHMS
• Knowledge of fue skills used in painting wifu watereolors
• Knowledge of the skills used to determine word mearung based on strue-
tural analysis
• Knowledge of fue various algorithrns for solving quadratic equations
• Knowledge of fue skills involved in perforroing Ihe high jump
54 Section II The Revised Taxonorny Srructure
cs. KNOWLEDGE OF SUSJECT-SPECIFIC TECHNIQUES AND METHODS
In contrast with specific skills and algorithrns that usually end in a fixed result,
some procedures do not lead to a single predetermined answer or solution. We
can follow the general scientific melhod in a somewhal sequenlial manner lo
design a study, for example, bul Ihe resulting experimental design can vary
greatly depemling on a hosl of faclors. In this subtype, Cb, of Pracedural knowl-
edge, Ihen, the result is more open and nol fixed, in contrasl lo subtype Ca,
Know1edge of skills and algorithms.
Knowledge of subject-specific techniques and methods includes knowledge thal
is largely the result of consensus, agreement, or disciplinary norms rather than
knowledge that is more directly an outcome of observalion, experimentation,
or discovery. This subtype of knowledge generally reflects how experts in the
field or discipline think and allack problems rather than the results of sueh
thought or problem solving. For example, knowledge of the general scientific
method and how to apply it to different situations, including social siluations
and policy problems, reflects a "scientific" way of thinking. Another example
is the "mathematization" of problems not originally presenled as mathematics
problems. For example, the simple problem of choosing a checkoul Hne in a
grocery store can be made inlo a malhematical problem thal draws on mathe-
matical knowledge and procedures (e.g., number of people in eaeh Hne, num-
ber of ilems per person).
EXAMPLES OF KNOWLEDGE OF SUBJECT-SPECIFIC TECHNIQUES
AND METHODS
• Knowledge of research methods relevanl lo the social sdences
• Knowledge of the techniques used by scientisls in seeking solutions lo
problems
• Knowledge of Ihe methods for evaluating health concepts
• Knowledge of various methods of lilerary criticism
CC. KNOWLEDGE OF CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING WHEN TO USE
ApPROPRIATE PROCEDURES
In addition lo knowing subjecl-specific procedures, studenls are expecled lo
know when lo use Ihem, which often involves knowing Ihe ways they have
been used in Ihe past. Such knowledge is nearly always of a hislorical or ency-
c10pedic Iype. Though simpler and perhaps less functional Ihan the ability to
actually use the procedures, knowledge of when to use appropriate procedures
is an important prelude to their proper use. Thus, before engaging in an in-
quiry, students may be expected to know the methods and techniques that
have been used in similar inquiries. At a laler stage in the inquiry, Ihey may be
expected to show relationships between the methods and lechniques they ac-
tuallyemployed and the methods employed by others.
Here again is a systematization that is used by subjeet maller experts as
Ihey altaek problems in their field. Experls know when and where to apply
Chapter 4 The Knowledge Dimension 55
their knowledge. They have criteria that help them make dedsions about when
and where to use different types of subject-specific proeedural knowledge; that
is, their knowledge is "conditionalized," in that they know the eonditions un-
der which the procedures are to be applied (Chi, Feltovich, and Glaser, 1981).
For example, in solving a physics problem, an expert can recognize the type of
physics problem and apply the appropriale proeedure (e.g., a problem thal in-
volves Newlon's second law, F = mal. Students therefore may be expected lo
make use of the erileria as well as have knowledge of them.
The ways in which Ihe criteria are used in actual problem situations is dis-
cussed in Chapler 5. Here, we refer only lo knowledge of criteria for determining
when to use appropriate procedures. The crileria vary markedly from subject mal-
ler to subject maller. lnilially, they are likely to appear complex and 'abslract lo
studenls; Ihey acquire meaning as they are relaled to concrete silualions and
problerns.
EXAMPLES OF KNOWLEDGE OF CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING WHEN
TO USE ApPROPRIATE PROCEDURES
• Knowledge of the criteria for delermining which of several types of essays
to write (e.g., exposilory, persuasive)
• Knowledge of the crileria for delermining whieh method lo use in solving
algebraic equations
• Knowledge of the criten a for delermining which stalistical procedure lo
use with data collecled in a particular experiment
• Knowledge of the criteria for determining whieh technique to apply to
create a desired effect in a particular watercolor painting
D. METACOGNITIVE KNOWLEDGE
Metacognitive knowledge is knowledge about cognition in general as well as
awareness of and knowledge about one's own eognition. One of the hallmarks
oi theory and researeh on learning sinee the publication of the original Hand-
book is the emphasis on making sludents more aware of and responsible for
their own knowledge and thought. This change euts acrosS different theorelical
approaehes to learning and development from neo-Piagetian models, to eogni-
tive and information processing models, to Vygotskian and cultural or situated
learning models. Regardless of their Iheoretical perspective, researchers gener-
ally agree that with development students will beeome more aware of their
own thinking as well as more knowledgeable about eognition in general, and
as they act on this awareness they will tend to learn betler (Bransford, Brown,
and Coeking, 1999). The labels for this general developmental trend vary from
Iheory to theory but include metaeogniti ve knowledge, metaeognitive aware-
ness, self-awareness, self-reflection, and self-regulation.
As we mentioned earlier, an important distinetion in the field is between
knowledge of cognition and the monitoring, control, and regulation of eog-
nition (e.g., Bransford, Brown, and Coeking, 1999; Brown, Bransford, Ferrara,
56 Section JI The Revised Taxonorny Structure
and Campione, 1983; Flavell, 1979; Paris and Winograd, 1990; Pintrich,
Wolters, and Baxter, in press; Schneider and Pressley, 1997; Zimmerman and
Schunk, 1998). Recognizing this distinction, in this chapter we describe only
students' knowledge of various aspects of cognition, not the actual monitor-
ing, control, and regulation of their cognition. In the way that the other types
of knowledge described in this chapter are acted upon in sorne way by the
cognitive processes described in Chapter 5, the same is true of Metacognitive
knowledge.
In Flavell's (1979) classic artide on metacognition, he suggested that
metacognition included knowledge of strategy, task, and person variables. We
have represented this general framework in our categories by induding stu-
dents' knowledge of general strategies for learning and thinking (strategic
knowledge) and their knowledge of cognitive tasks as well as when and why to
use these different strategies (knowledge about cognitive tasks). Finally, we in-
dude knowledge about the self (the person variable) in relation to both cogni-
tive and motivational components of performance (self-knowledge).
DA. STRATEGIC KNOWLEDGE
Strategic knowledge is knowledge of the general strategies for learning, thinking,
and problem solving. The strategies in this subtype can be used across many
different tasks and subject matters, rather than being most useful for one par-
ticular type of task in one specific subject area (e.g., solving a quadratic equa-
tion or applying Ohm's law).
This subtype, Da, indudes knowledge of the variety of strategies that stu-
dents might use to memorize material, extract meaning from text, or com-
prehend what they hear in classrooms or read in books and other course mate-
rials. The large number of different learning strategies can be grouped into
three general categories: rehearsal, elaboration, and organizational (Weinstein
and Mayer, 1986). Rehearsal strategies involve repeating words or terms to be
recalled over and over to oneself; they are generally not the most effective
strategies for deeper levels of learning and comprehension. In contrast, elabo-
ration strategies indude the use of various mnemonics for memory tasks as
well as techniques such as summarizing, paraphrasing, and selecting the main
idea from texts. Elaboration strategies foster deeper processing of the material
to be learned and result in better comprehension and learning than do rehearsal
strategies. Organizational strategies include various forms of outlining, draw-
ing "cognitive maps" or concept mapping, and note taking; students transform
the material from one form to another. Organizational strategies usually result
in better comprehension and learning than do rehearsal strategies.
In addition to these generallearning strategies, students can have knowl-
edge of various metacognitive strategies that are useful in planning, monitor-
ing, and regulating their cognition. Students can eventually use these strategies
to plan their cognition (e.g., set subgoals), monitor their cognition (e.g., ask
themselves questions as they read a piece of text, check their answer to a math
problem), and regulate their cognition (e.g., re-read something they don't un-
derstand, go back and "repair" their calculating mistake in a math problem).
Chapter 4 The Knowledge Dimension 57
Again, in this category we refer to students' knowledge of these various strate-
gies, not their actual use.
Finally, this subtype, Da, includes general strategies for problem solving
and thinking (Baron, 1994; Nickerson, Perkins, and Smith, 1985; Sternberg,
1985). These strategies represent the various general heuristics students can use
to solve problems, particularly ill-defined problems that have no definitive so-
lution method. Examples of heuristics are means-ends analysis and working
backward from the desired goal state. In addition to problem-solving strate-
gies, there are general strategies for deductive and inductive thinking, indud-
ing evaluating the validity of different logical statements, avoiding circularity
in arguments, making appropriate inferences from different sources of data,
and drawing on appropriate samples to make inferences (i.e., avoiding the
availability heuristic-making decisions from convenient instead of represen-
tative symbols).
EXAMPLES OF STRATEGIC KNOWLEDGE
• Knowledge that rehearsal of information is one way to retain the
information
• Knowledge of various mnemonic strategies for memory (e.g., the use of
acronyms such as Roy G Biv for the colors of the spectrum.)
• Knowledge of various elaboration strategies such as paraphrasing and
surnmarizing
• Knowledge of various organizational strategies such as outlining or
diagramming ,
• Knowledge of planning strategies such as setting goals for reading
• Knowledge of comprehension-monitoring strategies such as self-testing or
self-questioning
• Knowledge of means-ends analysis as a heuristic for solving an ill-defined
problem
• Knowledge of the availability heuristic and the problems of failing to sam-
pIe in an unbiased manner
Os. KNOWLEDGE ASOUT COGNITIVE TA5K5, INCLUDING CONTEXTUAL AND
CONDITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
In addition to knowledge about various strategies, individuals accumulate
knowledge about cognitive tasks. In his traditional division of Metacognitive
knowledge, Flavell (1979) included knowledge that different cognitive tasks can
be more or less difficult, may make differential demands on the cognitive sys-
tem, and may require different cognitive strategies. For example, a recall task is
more difficult than a recognition task. The recall task requires the person to
search memory actively and retrieve the relevant information, whereas the
recognition task requires only that the person discriminate among alternatives
and select the corree! or most appropriate answer.
ss Section n The Revised Taxonorny Structure
As students develop knowledge of different learning and thinking strate-
gies, this knowledge reflects both what general strategies to use and how to use
them. As with Procedural knowledge, however, this knowledge may not be suffi-
cient for expertise in learning. Students also need to develop the conditional
knowledge for these general cognitive strategies; in other words, they need to
develop sorne knowledge about the when and why of using these strategies
appropriately (Paris, Lipson, and Wixson, 1983). AH these different strategies
may not be appropriate for aH situations, and the learner must develop sorne
knowledge of the different conditions and tasks for which the different strate-
gies are most appropriate. Conditional knowledge refers to knowledge of the
situations in which students may use Metacognitive knowledge. In contrast, Pro-
cedural knowledge refers to knowledge of the situations in which students may
use subject-specific skills, algorithms, techniques, and methods.
If one thinks of strategies as cognitive "tools" that help students construct
understanding, then different cognitive tasks require different tools, just as a
carpenter uses different tools for performing aH the tasks that go into building
a house. Of course, one tool, such as a hammer, can be used in many different
ways for different tasks, but this is not necessarily the most adaptive use of a
harnmer, particularly if other tools are belter suited to sorne of the tasks. In the
same way, certain generallearning and thinking strategies are belter suited to
different tasks. For example, if one confronts a novel problem that is ill defined,
then general problem-solving heuristics may be useful. In contrast, if one con-
fronts a physics problem about the second law of thermodynamics, then more
specific Procedural knowledge is more useful and adaptive. An important aspect
of learning about strategies is the conditional knowledge of when and why to
use them appropriately.
Another important aspect of conditional knowledge is the local situational
and general social, conventional, and cultural norms for using different strate-
gies. For example, a teacher may encourage the use of a certain strategy for
monitoring reading comprehension. A student who knows that strategy is bet-
ter able to meet the demands of this teacher's dassroom. In the same manner,
different cultures and subcultures may have norms for the use of different
strategies and ways of thinking about problems. Again, knowing these norms
can help students adapt to the demands of the culture in terms of solving the
problem. For example, the strategies used in a classroom learning situation may
not be the most appropriate ones to use in a work setting. Knowledge of the dif-
ferent situations and the cultural norms regarding the use of different strategies
within those situations is an important aspect of Metacognitive knowledge.
EXAMPLES OF KNOWLEDGE ASOUT COGNITIVE TASKS, INCLUDING
CONTEXTUAL AND CONDITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
• Knowledge that recall tasks (i.e., ~hort-answer items) generally make
more demands on the individua!'s memory system than recognition tasks
(i.e., multiple-choice items)
• Knowledge that a primary source book may be more difficult to under-
stand than a general textbook or popular book
, ,
"
Chapler 4 The Knowledge Dimension 59
• Knowledge that a simple memorization task (e.g., remembering a phone
number) may require only rehearsal
• Knowledge that elaboration strategies like surnmarizing and paraphrasing
can result in deeper levels of comprehension
• Knowledge that general problem-solving heuristics may be most useful
when the individuallacks relevant subject- or task-specific knowledge or
in the absence of specific Procedural knowledge
• Knowledge of the local and general social, conventional, and cultural
norms for how, when, and why to use different strategies
Oc. SELF-KNOWLEDGE
Along with knowledge of different strategies and cognitive tasks, Flavell (1979)
proposed that self-knowledge was an important component of metacognition. In
his model self-knowledge indudes knowledge of one's strengths and weak-
nesses in relation to cognition and learning. For example, students who know
they generaHy do belter on multiple-choice tests than on essay tests have sorne
self-knowledge about their test-taking skills. This knowledge may be useful to
students as they study for the two different types of tests. In addition, one hall-
mark of experts is that they know when they do not know something and they
then have sorne general strategies for finding the needed and appropriate in-
formation. Self-awareness of the breadth and depth of one's own knowledge
base is an important aspect of self-knowledge. Finally, students need to be
aware of the different types of general strategies they are likely to rely on in dif-
ferent situations. An awareness that one tends to overrely on a particular strat-
egy, when there may be other more adaptive strategies for the task, could lead
to a change in strategy use.
In addition to knowledge of one's general cognition, individuals have be-
liefs about their motivation. Motivation is a complicated and confusing area,
with many models and theories available. Although motivational beliefs are
usually not considered in cognitive models, a fairly substantial body of litera-
ture is emerging that shows important links between students' motivational
beliefs and their cognition and learning (Snow, Corno, and Jackson, 1996; Pin-
trich and Schrauben, 1992; Pintrich and Schunk, 1996).
A consensus has emerged, however, around general social cognitive models
of motivation that propose three sets of motivational beliefs (Pintrich and
Schunk, 1996). Because these beliefs are social cognitive in nature, they fit into a
taxonomy of knowledge. The first set consists of self-efficacy beliefs, that is, stu-
dents' judgments of their capability to accomplish a specific task. The second set
indudes beliefs about the goals or reasons students have for pursuing a specific
task (e.g., learning vs. getting a good grade). The third set contains value and
interest beliefs, which represent students' perceptions of their personal interest
(Iiking) for a task as weH as their judgments of how important and useful the
task is to them. Just as students need to develop self-knowledge and awareness
about their own knowledge and cognition, they also need to develop self-
knowledge and awareness about their own motivation. Again, awareness of
po
60 Section n The Revised Taxonomy Structure
Ihese difierent motivational beliefs may enable leamers to monitor and regulate
Iheir behavior in learning situations in a more adaptive manner.
Self-knowledge is an important aspect of Metacognitive knowledge, but lhe
accuracy of self-knowledge seems to be most crucial for learning. We are not
advocating Ihat teaehers try to boost students' "self-esteem" (a completely dif-
ferent construct from self-knowledge) by providing students with positive but
false, inaccurate, and misleading feedback about Iheir academic strengths and
weaknesses. It is much more important for students to have accurate percep-
tions and judgments of their knowledge base and expertise than to have 'in-
flated and inaccurate self-knowledge (Pintrich and Schunk, 1996). If students are
not aware lhey do not know sorne aspect of Factual knowledge or Conceptual
know/edge or that Ihey don't know how to do something (Procedural knowledge),
it is unlikely Ihey will make ariy effort to leam the new material. A hallmark of
experts is that Ihey know what they know and what they do not know, and
Ihey do not have inflated or false impressions of their actual knowledge and
abilities. Accordingly, we emphasize lhe need for teaehers to help students
make accurate assessments of Iheir self-knowledge and not attempt to inflate stu-
dents' academic self-esteem.
EXAMPLES OF SELF .. KNOWLEPGE
• Knowledge that one is knowledgeable in sorne areas but not in olhers
• Knowledge Ihat one tends to rely on one type of "cognitive tool" (strategy)
in certain situations
• Knowledge of one's capabilities to perform a particular task that are accu-
rate, not inflated (e.g., overconfident)
• Knowledge of one's goals for performing a task
• Knowledge of one's personal interest in a task
• Knowledge of one's judgments about Ihe relative utility value of a task
ASSESSING OBJECTIVES INVOLVING METACOGNITIVE KNOWLEDGE
The assessment of objectives for Factual knowledge, Conceptual knowledge, and
Procedural knowledge is discussed in the next chapter because all objectives are
sorne combination of the Knowledge and Cognitive Process dimensions. Ac-
cordingly, it makes no sense to discuss assessment of Ihe knowledge categories
without also considering how the knowledge is to be used with the different
cognitive pracesses. Because Metacognitive knowledge is not discussed in much
detail in Ihe next chapter, however, a word about Ihe assessment of Metacogni-
tive knowledge is warranted here.
The assessment of objectives that relate to Metacognitive knowledge is unique
because Ihe objectives require a different perspective on what constitutes a "cor-
rect" answer. Unless the verb in the objective is associated with Ihe cognitive
process Crea te, most assessment tasks for objectives Ihat relate to Factual knowl-
edge, Conceptual knowledge, and Procedural knowledge have a "correct" answer.
Moreover, this answer is Ihe same for all students. For example, for an objective
Chapter 4 The Knowledge Dimension 61
that involves rememberingfactual knowledge, Ihe date on which Lincoln delivered
Ihe Gettysburg Address is Ihe same for aU students. For objectives Ihat involve
Metacognitive knowledge, in contrast, there may be important individual
differences and perspectives on Ihe "correct" answer. Furlher, eaeh of Ihe three
subtypes of Metacognitive knowledge may require a different perspective on
the 11 correctll answer.
For lhe first subtype, strategic knowledge, sorne knowledge about general
strategies may be "correct." For example, if students are asked to simply recall
sorne information about general strategies for memory (e.g., Ihe use of
acronyrns), Ihen Ihere is in fact a correct answer. On the olher hand, if students
are asked to apply this knowledge to a new situation, then there may be many
possible ways for Ihem to use acronyrns to help them remember Ihe important
information.
The other two subtypes of Metacognitive knowledge provide even more pos-
sibilities for individual differences to emerge in assessment. The subtype per-
taining to cognitive tasks does indude sorne knowledge lhat caUs for a correct
answer. For example, it is a truism that recognition tasks are easier Ihan recal!
tasks, so a question about this relationship does have a correct answer. On the
other hand, lhere are many different conditions, situations, contexts, and cul-
tures Ihat change the way general cognitive strategies can be applied. It is diffi-
cult to specify a correet answer to an assessment task wilhout sorne knowledge
of these different conditions and contexts.
Finally, assessing self-knowledge presents even more possibilities for indi-
vidual diHerences. Within this subtype it is assumed lhat individual students
vary in their knowledge and motivation. Moreover, how does one determine
"correct" answers for self-knowledge? Self-knowledge may even be faulty
(e.g., a student believes Ihat he does best on tests if he eats pepperoni pizza the
night before), and there should be occasions to correct Ihese faulty and super-
stitious beliefs. Perhaps the best way of assessing self-knowledge, however, is
by helping students become more aware and conscious of their own beliefs,
helping them determine Ihe feasibility of Ihese beliefs in light of what currently
is known about learning, and helping Ihem learn how to monitor and evaluate
these beliefs.
It is difficult to assess Metacognitive knowledge using simple paper-and-
pencil measures (Pintrich, Wolter, and Baxter, in press). Consequently, objec-
tives that relate to'Metacognitive knowledge may be best assessed in Ihe context
of classroom activities and discussions of various strategies. Certainly, courses
designed to teach students general strategies for learning and thinking (e.g.,
classes on learning strategies, thinking skills, study skills) engage students in
leaming about all three aspects of Metacognitive knowledge. Students can leam
about general strategies as well as how other students use strategies. They Ihen
can compare Iheir own strategies wilh lhose used by other students. Moreover,
elass discussions in any course, not just strategy courses, that focus on the is-
sues of leaming and thinking can help students become aware of their own
Metacognitive knowledge. As teaehers listen to students talk about their strate-
gies in lhese discussions, have conversations wilh students individually, or
review student journals about lheir own learning, teachers may gain some
I
I
62 Section II The Revise<! Taxonorny Structure
understanding of their students' Metacognitive knowledge. We have much to
leam about the best ways to assess Metacognitive knowledge, but given its im-
portance in learning, it seems timely to eontinue our efforts in fuis area.
CHAPTER S
CONCLUSION
In this ehapter we identified and described four types of knowledge: Factual,
Conceptual, Pracedural, and Metacognitíve. Factual knowledge and Conceptual knowl-
edge are most similar in fuat they involve the knowledge of "what," although
Conceptual knowledge is a deeper, more organized, integrated, and systemic
knowledge than just knowledge of terminology and isolated faets. Procedural
knowledge is fue knowledge of "how" to do something. These three categories
were all represented in fue original Taxonomy. Reflecting recent eognitive scienee
and eognitive psyehologieal research on fue importanee of metaeognition, we
have added a fourfu category: Metacognitive knowledge. In simplest terms,
Metacognitive knowledge is knowledge about eognition.
Although the importanee of differentiating among fuese four types of
knowledge may be apparent after reading this ehapter, fue next ehapter rein-
forees this view. In Chapter 5 we show how different types of knowledge tend
to be associated wifu eertain types of cognitive proeesses. The differentiation of
these knowledge types is furfuer explicated in fue diseussion of the vignettes
and fueir analysis in Chapters 8-13.
The Cognitive Process Dimension
In Chapter 4 we deseribed eaeh of fue four types of knowledge in detai!. Al-
though mueh of sehooling focuses on Factual knowledge, we suggested fuat this
linúted focus can be expanded by placing greater emphasis on a broader range
of knowledge types, including Conceptual knowledge; Procedural knowledge, and
Metacognitive knowledge. Similarly, in this ehapter we suggest lhat alfuough in-
struetion and assessment eommonly emphasize one kind of eognitive proeess-
ing-Remembering-sehooling can be expanded to indude a broader range of
eognitive processes. In fact, fue predominant use of fue original framework has
been in the analysis of eurrieula and examinations to demonstrate their
overemphasis on remembering and their laek of emphasis on fue more com-
plex process eategories (Anderson and Sosniak, Í994). The purpose of this
chapter is to describe fue full range of processes in more detai!.
Two of the most important educational goals are to promote retention and
to promote transfer (whieh, when it occurs, indicates meaningfullearning). Re-
lention is fue ability lo remember material at sorne later time in much fue same
way as it was presented during instruction. Transfer is the ability to use what
was leamed to solve new problems, to answer new questions, or to facilitate
leaming new subject matter (Mayer and Wittrock, 1996). In short, retention re-
quires fuat students remember what fuey have leamed, whereas transfer re-
quires students not only to remember but also lo make sense of and be able to
use what they have leamed (Bransford, Brown, and Cocking, 1999; Detterman
and Slemberg, 1993; McKeough, Lupart, and Marini, 1995; Mayer, 1995; Phye,
1997). Staled somewhal differe, ntly, retention focuses on fue past, whereas
transfer emphasizes fue future. After students read a textbook lesson on Ohm's
law, for example, a relention test might ask them to write fue formula for
Ohm's law. In contrast, a transfer test might ask students to rearrange an elec-
trical circuit to maximize the rate of electron flow or to use Ohm's law to ex-
plain a complex electric circuit.
Although educational objectives for promoting retention are fairly easy to
construct, educators may have more difficulty in formulating, teaehing, and as-
sessing objectives aimed at promoting transfer (Baxter, Elder, and Glaser, 1996;
Phye, 1997). Our revised framework is intended to help broaden fue typical set
of educational objectives to include fuose aimed at promoting transfer. We
63
64 Section U The Revised Taxonomy 5tructure
begin this chapter by introducing retention and transfer. Next, we describe our
six cognitive process categories (one that emphasizes retention and five that,
a1though they may facilitate retention, emphasize transfer). We end the chapter
with an example of how this ruscussion can be applied to teaching, leaming,
and assessing a lesson on Ohm's law.
A TALE' OF THREE LEARNING OUTCOMES
~c.:, ~ i. o
t \i'·' f: c.~ '
...., , ..
__ I,.U ...
'
. I~ :,,\
As an introduction, we briefly consider three leaming scenarios. The first ex-
emplifies no leaming (that is, no intended leaming), the second rote leaming,
and the third meaningfulleaming.
NO LEARNING
Am Y reads a chapter on electrical circuits in her science textbook. She skims the
material, sure that the test will be a breeze. When she is asked to recall part of
the lesson (as a retention test), she is able lo remember very few of the key
terrns and facts. For example, she cannot list the major compbnents in.an elec-
trical circuit even though they were described in the chapter. When she is
asked to use the information to solve problems (as part of a transfer test), she
cannot. For example, she cannot answer an essay question that asks her to diag-
nose a problem in an electrical circuito In this worst-case scenario, Amy
neither possesses nor is able to use the relevant knowledge. Amy has neither
sufficiently atlended to nor encoded the material during learning. The result-
ing outcome can be characterized as essentially no leaming.
ROTE LEARNING
Becky reads the same chapter on electrical circuits. She reads carefully, making
sure she reads every word. She goes over the material and memorizes the key
facts. When she is asked to recall the material, she can remember aImost all of
the important terms and facts in the lesson. Unlike Amy, she is able lo list the
major components in an electrical circuit. When she is asked to use the informa-
tion to solve problems, however, she cannot. Like Amy, she cannot answer the
essay question about the diagnosis of a problem in an electrical circuit. In this
scenario, Becky possesses relevant knowledge but cannot use that knowledge
lo solve problems. She cannot transfer this knowledge to a new situation. Becky
has attended to relevant information, but she has not understood it and there-
fore cannot use it. The resulting learning outcome can be called rote leaming.
MEANINGFUL LEARNING
Carla reads the same textbook chapter on electrical circuits. She reads careful] y,
trying to make sense out of it. When she is asked to recall the material, she, like
Becky, can remember almost all of the important terms and facts in the lesson.
Furthermore, when she is asked to use the information to solve problems, she
genera tes many possible solutions. In this scenario, not only does Carla pos-
Chapter 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 65
sess relevant knowledge, but she also can use that knowledge to solve prob-
lems and to understand new concepts. She can transfer her knowledge to new
problems and new leaming situations. Carla has attended to relevant informa-
tion and has understood it. The resulting leaming outcome can be called mean-
ingfulleaming.
Meaningfullearning provides students with the knowledge and cognitive
processes they need for successful problem solving. Problem solving occúrs
when a student devises a way of achieving a goal that he or she has never pre-
viously achieved, that is, of figuring out how to change a situation from its
given state into a goal state (Duncker, 1945; Mayer, 1992). Two major compo-
nents in problem solving are problem representation-in which a student
builds a mental representation of the problem-and problem solution-in
which a student devises and carnes out a plan for solving the problem (Mayer,
1992). Consistent with recent research (Gick and Holyoak, 1980, 1983; Vosnia-
dou and Ortony, 1989), the authors of the original Handbook recognized that
students often solve problems by analogy. That is; they reformulate the prob-
lelÍl in a more familiar form, recognize that it is similar to a farniliar problem
type, abstract the solution method for that familiar problem type, and then ap-
ply the method to the to-be-solved problem.
MEANINGFUL LEARNING AS CONSTRUCTING KNOWLEDGE FRAMEWORKS
A foeus on meaningful learning is consistent with the view of learning as
knowledge construction, in which students seek to make sense of their exper-
iences. In constructivist learning, as mentioned on page 38, students engage in
active cognitive processing, such as paying aUention to relevant incoming in-
formation, mentally organizing incoming information into a coherent represen-
tation, and mentally integrating incoming information with existing knowl-
edge (Mayer, 1999). In contrast, a focus on rote learning is consistent with the
view of leaming as knowledge acquisition, in which students seek to add new
information to their memories (Mayer, 1999).
Constructivist leaming (i.e., meaningfullearning) is recognized as an im-
portant educational goal. It requires that instruction go beyond the simple pre-
sentation of factual knowledge and that assessment tasks require more of stu-
dents than simply recall or recognition of factual knowledge (Bransford,
Brown, and Cocking, 1999; Lambert and McCombs, 1998; Marshall, 1996; Steffe
and Gale, 1995). The cognitive processes surnmarized in this chapter provide a
means of describing the range of students' cognitive activities in constructivist
learning; that is, these processes are ways in which students can actively en-
gage in the process of constructing meaning.
COGNITIVE PROCESSES FOR RETENTION AND TRANSFER
If we were interested mainly in teaching and assessing the degree to which stu-
dents learned sorne subject malter content and retained it over sorne period of
time, we would focus primarily on one elass of cognitive processes-namely,
those associated with Remember. In contrast, if we wish to expand our focus by
I
66 Section JI The Revised Taxonomy Structure
examining ways to foster and assess meaningfullearning, we need to examine
processes !hat go beyond remembering.
What cognitive processes are used for retention and transfer? As we dis-
cussed, oue revised framework includes six categories of processe~ne most
closely related to retention (Remember) and Ihe other five increasingly related
to transfer (Understand, Apply, Analyze, Evaluate, and Create). Based on a review
of Ihe illustrative objectives Usted in Ihe original Handbook and an examination
of other classification syslems (e.g., DeLandsheere, 1977; Metfesse!, Michael,
and Kirsner, 1969; Mosenlhal, 1998; Royer, Ciscero, and CarIo, 1993; Stemberg,
1998), we have selected 19 cognitive processes that fit within these six cate-
gories. Table 5.1 provides a brief definition and example of each cognitive
process, lists Iheir alternative names, and indicates Ihe category to which it be-
longs. These 19 specific cognitive processes are intended to be mulually exclu-
sive; togelher they delineate Ihe breadlh and boundaries of the six categories.
CATEGORIES OF THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
In Ihe discussion !hat follows, we define Ihe cognitive processes within eaeh of
Ihe six categories in detall, making comparisons wilh olher cognitive processes,
where appropriate. We offer sample educational objectives and assessments in
various subject areas as wel! as altemative versions of assessment lasks. Eaeh
illustrative objective in lhe fol!owing malerial should be read as Ihough pre-
ceded by Ihe phrase "The sludent is able to ... " or "The sludent leams to .... "
1. REMEMBER
When the objective of instruction is to promote retention of the presented
material in mueh Ihe same form as it was taught, Ihe relevant process category
is Remember. Remembering involves retrieving relevant knowledge from long-
term memory. The two associated cognitive processes are recognizing and recall-
ing. The relevant knowledge may be Factual, Conceptual, Procedural, or Metacog-
nitive, or some combination of Ihese.
To assess sludent learning in the simplest process category, Ihe sludent is
given a recognition or recal! task under conditions very similar to Ihose in
whieh he or she leamed Ihe material. Uttle, if any, extension beyond those con-
ditions is expected. If, for example, a student leamed Ihe English equivalents
of 20 Spanish words, then a test of remembering couId involve requesting Ihe
sludent to match the Spanish words in one list wilh their English equivalents
in a second list (Le., recognize) or to write Ihe corresponding English word next
to each of the Spanish words presented in the list (Le., recal/).
Remembering knowledge is essential for meaningfullearning and problem
solving as Ihat knowledge is used in more eomplex tasks. For example, knowl-
edge of the correet spelling of common English words appropriate to a given
grade level is necessary if the student is to master writing an essay. Where
teaehers Concentrate solely on rote learning, teaching and assessing focus
solely on remembering elements or fragments of knowledge, often in isolation
from Iheir eontext. When teaehers focus on meaningfullearning, however, re-
5.1 THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
CATEGORIES
Be COGNITIVE ALTERNATIVE
PROCESSES NAMES DEFINITIONS AND EXAMPLES
!. REMBMIIER-Retrieve relevant knowIedgt' from long-termmemory
1.1 RECOGNIZ,ING Identifying Locating knowledge in long-term memory Ihat is consistent
wilh presented material (e.g., Recognize Ihe dates of
important events in U.S. history)
1.2 RECALLING Retrieving Retrieving relevant knowledge from long-term memory
(e.g., Recall Ihe dates of important events in U.S. history)
2. UNDIERSTAND-Construct meaning from instructional meseages, including oral, written, and
graphic communication
2. ! INTERPRETING Clarifying, Changing from one foem of representation (e.g., numerical)
paraphrasing, to anolher (e.g., verbal) (e.g., Paraphrase important speeches
representing, and documents)
translating
2.2 EXEMPLIFYING IDustrating, Finding a specific example or illuslration of a concept or prin-
instantiating ciple (e.g., Give examples of various artistic painting styles)
2.3 CLASSIFYING Categorizing, Determining Ihat sornething belongs to a category (e.g.,
subsurning concept or principIe) (e.g., CIassify observed or described
cases of mental disorders) ,
2.4 SUMMARIZING Abstracting, Abstracting a general Iheme or major point(s) (e.g., Write a
generalizing short surnmary of lhe events portrayed on a videotape)
2.5 INFERRING Concluding, Drawing a logical conclusion from presented information
extrapolating, (e.g., In leaming a foreign language, infer grarnmatical
interpolating, principies from examples)
predicting
2.6 COMPARING Contrasting, Detecting correspondences between two ideas, objects, and
mapping, Ihe like (e.g., Compare historical events to contemporary
matching situations)
2_7 I!XPLAINING Constructing Constructing a cause-and-effect model of a system (e.g., Ex-
models plain Ihe causes of important 181h-century events in France)
3. APPLV-Carry out or use a procedure In a glven situation
3.! EXECUTING 3.2 IMPLEMENTING Using Carrying out Applying a procedure to a familiar task (e.g., Divide one
whole number by anolher whole number, bolh wilh
multiple digits)
Applying a procedure to an unfarniliar task (e.g., Use New-
ton's Second Law in siluations in which it is appropriate)
5.1 THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION (CONTINUED)
CATEGORIES
Be COGNITIVE ALTERNATIVE
PROCESSES NAMES DEFINITIONS AND EXAMPLES
4. ANALYZlE-Break material inlo its constitut>nt parts and determine how!he parts relate lo one
another and lo an overall stnlcture or purpose
4.1 DIFF'ERENTIATING Discrirninating, Distinguishing relevant from irrelevant parts or impor·
distinguishing, tant from unimportant parts of presented material
focusing, (e.g., Distinguish between relevant and irrelevant
selecting numbers in a malhematical word problem)
4.2 ORGANIXING 4.3 ATTRIBUTING Finding Determining how elements fit or function within a
coherence, structure (e.g., Structure evidence in a historical
intergrating, description into evidence for and against a particular
outlining, historical explanation)
parsing,
structuring
Deconstructing Determine a point of view, bias, values, or intent under-
lying presented materia! (e.g., Determine Ihe point 01
view of Ihe aulhor of an essay in terms of his or her
political perspective)
s. EVALuATE-Make judgments based on criteria and standards
5. I CHECKING 5.2 CRITIQUING Coordinating, Detecting inconsistencies or fallacies within a proeess or
deteeting, monitoring, testing product; deterrnining whelher a proeess or product has
internal consistency; detecting Ihe effeetiveness of a pro-
eedure as it is being implemented (e.g., Determine if a
scientist's eonclusions follow from observed data)
Judging Detecting inconsistencies between a product and exter-
na! criteria, determining whelher a product has exter-
na! consisteney; detecting Ihe appropriateness of a pro-
cedure for a given problern (e.g., Judge which of two
melhods is Ihe best way to solve a given problem)
ti. C R EAT E-Put elements together lo form a coherent or functional whole; reorganize elements
inlo a new pattem or structure
6.1 GENERATING Hypolhesizing Corning up wilh alternative hypolheses based on
criteria (e.g., Generate hypolheses to aecount for an
observed phenomenon)
6.2 PLANNING Designing Devising a procedure for aceomplishing sorne task (e.g.,
Plan a research paper on a given historical topie)
6.3 PRODUCING Constructing Inventing a product (e.g., Build habitats for a speeific
purpose)
Chapter 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 119
membering knowledge is integrated within Ihe larger task of construeting new
knowledge or solving new problems.
1. 1 RECOGNIZING
Recognizing involves retrieving relevant knowledge from long-term memory in
order to compare it with presented information. In recognizing, Ihe student
searches long-term memory for a piece of information Ihat is identieal or ex-
tremely similar to Ihe presented irúormation (as represented in working mem-
ory). When presented wilh new information, Ihe student determines whether !hat
irúormation corresponds to previously learned knowledge, searching for a match.
An alternative term for recognizing is identifying.
SAMPLE OBJECTIVES AND C:ORRI!SPONDING ASSESSMENTS In social
studies, an objective could be for students to recognize the correet dates of im-
portant events in US. history. A eorresponding test item is: "True or falseo The
Declaration of Independence was adopted on July 4, 1776." In literature, an ob-
jective could be lo recognize aulhors of British literary works. A corresponding
assessmenl is a matching test that contains a list of ten aulhors (inc1uding
Charles Dickens) and a list of slightly more Ihan ten novels (inc1uding David
Capperfie/á). In malhernaties, an objective could be to reeognize Ihe numbers of
sides in basic geometrie shapes. A eorresponding assessmenl is a multiple-
choice test wilh items sueh as Ihe following: "How many sides does a penta-.
gon have? (a) four, (b) five, (e) six, (d) seven."
ASSESSMENT FORMATS As illustrated in the preceding paragraph, three
main melhods of presenting a reeognilion task for Ihe purpose of assessment
are verification, matching, and foreed choice. In verification tasks, Ihe student
is given sorne irúormation and must choose whether or not it is. correet. The
true-false format is the most eornmon example. In matching, two lists are pre-
sented, and the student must ehoose how each item in one list eorresponds to
an item in the olher listo In foreed choice tasks, Ihe student is given a prompt
a!ong wilh severa! possible answers and must choose which answer is the cor-
rect or "best answer." Multiple-choice is Ihe most common formal.
1.2 RECALLING
Recalling involves retrieving relevant knowledge from long-term memory
when given a prompt to do so. The prompt is often a question. In reca/ling, a
student searches long-term memory for a piece of irúormation and brings Ihat
piece of information to working memory where it can be processed. An alter-
native term for recalling is retrieving.
SAMPLE OBJECTIVES AND C:ORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In recall-
ing, a student remembers previously learned irúormation when given a
prompl. In social studies, an objective could be to reeall Ihe major exports of
various Soulh American eountries. A corresponding test item is "What is the
I
I
I
I
70 Section II The Revised Taxonorny Structure
major exporl of Bolivia?" In literature, an objective could be to recall Ihe poets
who wrote various poems. A corresponding lest question is "Who wrote The
Charge of the Light Brigade?" In malhemalics.an objective could be to recall Ihe
whole--number mulliplicalion faets. A eorresponding tesl ilem asks studenls lo
mulliply 7 x 8 (or "7 x 8 = ?").
ASSESSMENT FORMATS Assessmenl lasks for recalling can vary in Ihe
number and quality of cues Ihal studenls are provided. Wilh low eueing, Ihe
studenl is nol given any hinls or relaled informalion (such as "Whal is a
meler?"). Wilh high cueing, Ihe sludenl is given several hinls (such as "In Ihe
metric system, a meter is a measure of .").
Assessment tasks for recalling can also vary in Ihe amounl of embedding, or
Ihe exlenl lo which Ihe ilems are placed wilhin a larger meaningful conlext.
Wilh low embedding, Ihe recaU lask is presented as a single, isolaled evenl, as in
Ihe preceding examples. Wilh high embedding, Ihe recaU lask is included within
Ihe contexl of a larger problem, such aS asking a studenl lo recall Ihe formula for
Ihe area of a circle when solving a word problem Ihal requires !hal formula.
2. UNDERSTAND
As we indicaled, when Ihe primary goal of instruction is lo promole relenlion,
Ihe focus is on objeclives Ihal emphasize Remember. When Ihe goal of instruc-
tion is lo promole Iransfer, however, Ihe focus shifts lo Ihe olher five cognitive
processes, Understand Ihrough Create. Of Ihese, arguably Ihe largest calegory of
transfer-based educalional objeclives emphasized in schools and colleges is
Understand. Sludents are said to Understand when Ihey are able to construet
meaning from inslruetional messages, induding oral, written, and graphic
communieations, however Ihey are presenled to sludenls: during leelures, in
books, or on computer monitors. Examples of polenlial instructional messages
indude an in-dass physics demonstralion, a geological formalion seen on a
field Irip, a computer simulalion of a lrip Ihrough an arl museum, and a musi-
cal work played by an orcheslra, as well as numerous verbal, piclorial, and
symbolic representalions on papero
Studenls undersland when Ihey build conneclions belween Ihe "new"
knowledge lo be gained and Iheir prior knowledge. More specifieally, Ihe incom-
ing knowledge is inlegraled wilh existing schemas and cognilive frameworks.
Since concepts are Ihe building blocks for Ihese schemas and frameworks, Con-
ceptual knowledge provides a basis for underslanding. Cognilive processes in Ihe
calegory of Understand inelude interpreting, exemplifying, classifying, summarizing,
inferring, comparing, and explaining.
2.1 INTERPRETING
Interpreting occurs when a student is able to eonverl information from one rep-
resenlational form lo anolher. Interpreting may involve eonverting words lo
words (e.g., paraphrasing), pictures to words, words to pictures, numbers to
words, words to numbers, musical notes to Iones, and Ihe like.
Chapter 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 71
Allernative terms are translating, paraphrasing, representing, and clarifying.
SAMPLE OO.JECTIVES AND CORR~SPONDING ASSESSMENTS . In inter-
preting, when given informalion in one form of representation, a student is able
to change il into anolher formo In social studies; for example, an objective could
be lo leam lo paraphrase important speeehes and documents from Ihe Civil
War period in US. hislory. A eorresponding assessment asks a sludenl to para-
phrase a famous speech, such as Lincoln' s Gettysburg Address. In scienee, an
objective could be lO leam lo draw pictorial represenlations of various natural
phenomena. A corresponding assessmenl item asks a sludenl lo draw a series
of diagrams illuslrating photosynlhesis. In malhematics, a sample objeetive
could be lo leam to Iranslale number senlences expressed in words inlo alge-
braic equations expressed in symbols. A corresponding assessmenl ilem asks a
sludenl lo wrile an equation (using B for Ihe number of boys and G for Ihe
number of girls) lhal corresponds lo the stalemenl "There are Iwice as many
boys as girls in lhis elass."
ASSESSMENT FORMATS Appropriale lest item formats inelude bolh con-
strucled response (i.e., supply an answer) and selected response (i.e., choose an
answer). Inforrnalion is presented in one form, and sludents are asked eilher to
construct or to select Ihe same information in a different formo For example, a
constructed response task is: "Write an equation !hat eorresponds to Ihe foUow-
ing statement, using T for lotal cost and P for number of pounds. The total cost
of mailing a package is $2.00 for lhe firsl pound plus $1.50 for each additional
pound." A selection version of Ihis task is: "Which equation corresponds to Ihe
following statement, where T stands for total cost and P for number of pounds?
The total cost of mailing a package is $2.00 for Ihe first pound plus $1.50 for eaeh
additional pound. (a) T = $3.50 + P, (b) T = $2.00 + $1.50(P), (e) T = $2.00 +
$l.50(P - 1)."
To increase the probability that interpreting ralher Ihan remembering is be-
ing assessed, Ihe information included in the assessment task mupl be new.
"New" here means that sludents did not encounter it during instruction. Un-
less this rule is observed, we eannol ensure !hat interpreting ralher !han remem-
bering is being assessed. If the assessment lask is identical to a lask or example
used during instruclion, we are probably assessing remembering, despite our
efforls to lhe contrary.
Allhough we will nol repeat this point from here on, it applies to each of
the process calegories and eognitive processes beyond Remember. If assess-
ment tasks are to tap higher-order cognitive processes, lhey must require
lhat students cannot answer lhem correctly by relying on memory alone.
2.2 EXEMPLIFYING
Exemplifying occurs when a sludent gives a specific example or instance of a
general eoncept or principIe. Exemplifying involves identifying Ihe defining
features of Ihe general concept or principie (e.g., an isosceles triangle musl
have Iwo equal sides) and using Ihese fealures to select or construct a specific
72 Sectíon II The Revised Taxonomy Structure
instanee (e.g., being able to seleet whieh of furee presenled triangles is an
isosceles triangle). Altemative lerms are illustrating and instantiating.
SAMPLE OBJECTIYES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In exem-
plifying, a sludenl is given a eoneept or principie and musí seleet or produce a
speeifie example or instanee of il lhal was not eneountered during inslruction.
In arl hislory, an objective eould be lo leam lo give examples of various artistie
painting s!yles. A eorresponding assessmenl asks a sludenl lo select which of
four painlings represents lhe impressionist s!yle. In scienee, a sample objeetive
could be to be able to give examples of various kinds of chemieal eompounds.
A eorresponding assessment task asks lhe student to loeate an inorganie eom-
pound on a field trip and tell why it is inorganie (i.e., specify lhe defining fea-
tures). In literature, an objeetive eould be to leam to exemplify various play
genres. The assessmenl may give lhe sludents brief skelehes of four plays (only
one of which is a romantie eomedy) and ask Ihe sludenl lo name lhe play that
is a romantie eomedy.
ASSESSMENT FORMATS Exemplifying lasks can involve lhe eonslrueted re-
sponse format-in whieh lhe student must creale an example----or lhe selee!ed
response formal-in whieh Ihe sludent musí selee! an example from a given
sel. The scienee example, "Locale an inorganic compound and lell why il is in-
organie," requlres a eonslructed response. In eontrast, lhe item "Which of lhese
is an inorganie eompound? (a) iron, (b) prolein, (e) blood, (d) leaf mold" re-
quires a selecled response.
2.3 CLASSIFYING
Classifying oceurs when a sludent recognizes lhat somelhing (e.g., a particular
inslanee or example) belongs to a eerlain ealegory (e.g., eoneept or principie).
Classifying involves delee!ing relevant features or patterns Ihal "fit" bolh lhe
specific inslanee and lhe eoncepl or principie. Classifying is a eomplemenlary
process lo exemplifying. Whereas exemplifying begins wilh a general concept or
principie and requires the student to find a specific instance or example, classi-
fying begins with a specifie instanee or example and requires lhe student to find
a general eoncept or principie. Alternative terms for c/assifying are eategorizing
and subsuming.
SAMPLE OBJECTIVES AND CORRESPQNDING ASSESSMENTS In social
studies, an objeelive could be to learn to c1assify observed or deseribed cases of
mental disorders. A eorresponding assessment ilem asks a studenl to observe a
video of lhe behavior of a person wilh mental illness and lhen indicate lhe mental
disorder !hat is displayed. In lhe natural sciences, an objective eould be to learn lo
categorize lhe species of various prehistoric animals. An assessment gives a stu-
dent sorne pictures of prehisloric animals wilh inslructions to group lhem wilh
olhers of lhe same species. In malhematies, an objeetive could be to be able to de-
Chapler 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 73
termine lhe eategories to which numbers belong. An assessment task gives an ex-
ample and asks a student to circle all numbers in a Iist from lhe same calegory.
ASSESSMENT FORMATS In eonstrueted response tasks, a sludent is given
an instanee and must produce its related eoneept or principie. In selecled re-
sponse tasks, a student is given an instance and must select its eoneepl or prin-
cipie from a Iisl. In a sorting task, a studenl is given a sel of instanees and must
delennine which ones belong in a specified eategory and which ones do not, or
must place eaeh instanee into one of multiple eategories.
2.4. SUMMARIZING
Summarizing oceurs when a sludent suggests a single statemenl lhat represents
presented infonnation or abstraets a general theme. Summarizing involves con-
slrueting a representation of lhe information, such as lhe meaning of a scene in
a play, and abstraeting a summary from il, sueh as delermining a theme or
main poinls. Alternative terms are generalizing and abstracting.
SAMPLE OBJECTIVES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In sum-
marizing, when given information, a sludent provides a summary or abslrae!s
a general theme. A sample objective in hislory eould be lo leam to wrile short
summaries of events portrayed pietorially. A eorresponding assessment item
asks a student to watch a videotape on lhe French Revolution and lhen write a
short surnmary. Similarly, a sample objective in the natural scienees eould be to
leam lo summarize lhe major eontributions of famous scientists afler reading
several of lheir writings. A corresponding assessment item asks a student to
read selected writings about Charles Darwin and summarize lhe major poinls.
In computer scienee, an objective eould be to learn to summarize lhe purposes
of various subroutines in a programo An assessment item presents a program
and asks a sludent to write a sentenee describing lhe subgoal !hat each seetion
of the program aeeomplishes wilhin lhe overall programo
ASSESSMENT FORMATS Assessmenl tasks can be presented in eonstructed
response or seleetion formats,involving either lhemes or summaries. Gener-
ally speaking, themes are more abstract lhan summaries. For example, in a eon-
slrueted response task, the sludent may be asked to read an untitled passage
on lhe Califomia Gold Rush and then write an appropriate title. In a selection
task, a sludent may be asked to read a passage on lhe California Gold Rush and
lhen sele'ct lhe most appropriale title from a list of four possible titles or rank
the tilles in order·of lheir "fil" to lhe point of lhe passage.
2.5 INFERRING
Inferring involves finding a pattern wilhin a series of examples or instanees.
lnferring oeeurs when a sludent is able lo abstract a eoneept or principie Ihat
74 Section II The Revised Taxonorny Structure
accounts for a set of examples or instances by encoding lhe relevant features of
each instance and, most important, by noting relationships among them. For
example, when given a series of numbers such as 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, a student is
able to focus on the numerical value of each digit ralher lhan on irrelevant fea-
tures such as the shape of each digit or whether each digit is odd or even. He
or she lhen is able to distinguish lhe pattern in lhe series of numbers (i.e., afler
lhe first two numbers, each is lhe sum of the preceding two numbers).
The process of inferring involves making comparisons among instances
within lhe context of lhe entire seto For example, to determine what number
will come next in the series aboye, a student must identify lhe pattern. A re-
lated process is using lhe pattern to create a new instance (e.g., lhe next num-
ber on the series is 34, lhe sum of 13 and 21). This is an example of executing,
whlch IS a cognitive process associated with Apply. Inferring and executing are
oflen used togelher on cognitive tasks.
Finally, inferring is different from attributing (a cognitive process associated
with Analyze). As we discuss later in this chapter, attributing focuses solely on
the pragmatic issue of determining lhe author's point of view or intention,
whereas inferring focuses on lhe issue of inducing a pattem based on presented
information. Anolher way of differentiating between lhese two is that altribut-
ing is broadly applicable to situations in which one must "read between lhe
lines/' especially when one is seeking lo determine an author's point of view.
Infemng, on lhe other hand, occurs in a context !hat supplies an expectation of
what is to be inferred. Alternative terms for inf erring are extrapolating, interpo-
lating, predicting, and concluding.
~AMPLE OB,JECTIVES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In infer-
rmg, when glven a set or series of examples or instances, a student finds a
concept or principie that accounts for them. For example, in leaming Spanish
as a second language, a sample objective could be to be able to infer grarnmat-
Ical prmclples from examples. For assessment, a student is given the article-
noun pairs "la casa, el muchacho, la señorita, el pero" and asked to formulate
a principie for when to use "la" and when to use "el." In mathematics, an ob-
jective could be to learn to infer lhe relationship expressed as an equation that
represents several observations of values for two variables. An assessment
item asks a student to describe lhe relationship as an equation involving x and
y for situations in which if x is 1, then y is O; if x is 2, then y is 3; and if x is 3,
lheny is 8.
ASSES~MENT FOR~ATS Three common tasks lhat require inferring (often
along W1lh lmplementmg) are completion tasks, analogy tasks, and oddity tasks.
In completion tasks, a student is given a series of items and must determine
what will come next, as in lhe number series example aboye. In analogy tasks,
a student 18 g¡ven an analogy of the forro A is to B as e is to O, such as "nation"
is to "president" as IIstate" is to . The student's task is to pro-
duce or select a term lhat fits in lhe blank and completes lhe analogy (such as
"governor"). In an oddity task, a student is given three or more items and must
Chapter 5 The Cognitive Process Dirnension 75
determine whieh does not belong. For example, a student may be given three
physics problems, two involving one principie and another involving a differ-
ent principie. To focus solely on lhe inferring process, lhe question in each as-
sessment task could be to sta te lhe underlying concept or principie lhe student
is using to arrive at lhe correct answer.
2.6 COMPARING
Comparing involves detecting similarities and differences between two or more
objects, events, ideas, problems, or situations, such as detennining how a well-
known event (e.g., a recent political scandal) is like a less familiar event (e.g., a
historical political scandal). Comparing ineludes finding one-to-one correspon-
dences between elements and patterns in one object, event, or idea and lhose
in anolher object, event, or idea. When used in conjunction wilh inferring (e.g.,
first, abstracting a rule from lhe more familiar situation) and implementing (e.g.,
second, applying the rule to lhe less familiar situation), comparing can con-
tribute to reasoning by analogy. Alternative terms are contrasting, matching,
and mapping.
SAMPLE OBJECTIVES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In com-
paring, when given new information, a student detects correspondences wilh
more familiar knowledge. For example, in social studies, an objective could be
to understand historieal events by comparing lhem to familiar situations. A
corresponding assessment question is "How is the American Revolution like
a family fight or an argument between friends?" In lhe natural sciences, a
sample objective could be to leam to compare an electrical circuit to a more
familiar system. In assessment, we ask "How is an electrieal circuit like water
flowing through a pipe?"
Comparing may also involve determining correspondences between two or
more presented objects, events, or ideas. In mathematics, a sample objective
could be to learn to compare structurally similar word problems. A corre-
sponding assessment question asks a student to tell how a certain mixture
problem is like a certain work problem.
ASSESSMENT FORMATS A major technique for assessing the cognitive
process of comparing is mapping. In mapping, a student must show how each
part of one object, idea, problem, or situation corresponds to (or maps onto)
each part of anolher. For example, a student could be asked to detail how lhe
battery, wire, and resistor in an electrical circuit are like lhe pump, pipes, and
pipe constructions in a water flow system, respectively.
2.7 EXPLAINING
Explaining occurs when a student is able to construct and use a cause-and-
effect modeI of a system. The model may be derived from a formal lheory (as is
76 Section n The Revised Taxonorny Structure
often the case in the natural scienees) or may be grounded in research or expe-
nence (as is often the case in the social sciences and humanities). A complete
explanation involves eonstrueting a cause-and-effect model, induding eaeh
major part in a system or each major event in the ehain, and using the model
to determine how a change in one part of the system or one "link" in the chain
affects a ehange in another part. An altemative term for explaining ís eonstruet-
ing a mode!.
SAMPLE OSJECTIYES AND CORRES
PONDING ASSESSMENTS In ex-
_
p/aining, when given a deseríption of a system, a student develops and uses a
eause-and-effect model of the system. For example, in social studies, an objee-
tíve could be to explain the causes of important eighteenth-century historieal
events. As an assessment, after reading and discussing a unit on the American
Revolutíon, students are asked to construct a eause-and-effect chain oí events
that best explains why the war occurred. In the natural sciences, an objective
could be to explain how basic physics laws work. Corresponding assessments
ask students who have studied Ohm's law to explain what happens to the rate
of the current when a second battery is added to a circuít, or ask students who
have viewed a video on Iightning storms to explain how differences in temper-
ature affect the formatíon of Iightning.
ASSI!:SSMENT FORMATS Several tasks can be aimed at assessing a stu-
dent' s abílíty to explain, inc1uding reasoning, troubleshooting, redesigning,
and predictíng. In reasoning tasks, a student is asked to offer a reason for a
gíven event. For example, "Why does air enter a bieyele tire pump when you
pull up on the handle?" In this case, an answer such as "It is forced in beeause
the air pressure is less inside the pump than outside" involves finding a princi-
pie that accounts for a given event.
In troubleshooting, a student is asked to diagnose what eould have gone
wrong in a malfunctíoning system. For example, "Suppose you pull up and
press down on the handle of a bicycle tíre pump several times but no air comes
out. What's wrong?" In thís case, the student must find an explanation for a
symptom, such as "There is a hole in the cylinder" or "A valve is stuck in the
open position."
In redesigrung, a student is asked to change the system to aecomplísh sorne
goal. For example, "How eould you improve a bicyde tire pump so that it
would be more efficient?" To answer this question, a student must imagine
altering one or more of the components in the system, such as "Put lubricant
between the piston and the cylinder."
In predictíng, a student ís asked how a change in one part of a system will
effect a change in another part of the system. For example, "What would hap-
pen if you increased the diameter of the cylinder in a bicyc1e tire pump?" 1bis
question requires that the student "operate" the mental model of the pump to
see that the amount of air moving through the pump eould be increased by in-
creasing the diameter of the cylinder.
3. APPLY
3.1 EXECUTING
Chapter 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 77
App/y involves using procedures to perform exercises or solve problems. Thus,
App/y is dosely linked with Procedura/ Jenow/edge. An exereise is a task for which
the student already knows the proper procedure to use, so the student has
developed a fairly routirtized approach to it. A problem is a task for which the
student irtitially does not know what procedure to use, so the student must
locate a procedure to solve the problem. The App/y category consists of two
cogrtitive p rocesses: executing-when the task is an exercise (familiar)-and
implementing-when the taskis a problem (unfarrtiliar).
When the task is a famílíar exereise, students generally know what Proce-
dura/ Jenowledge to use. When given an exercise (or set of exercíses), students
typically perform the procedure with Iittle thought. For example, an algebra
studeot confronted with the 50th exercise involving quadratic equations might
simply "plug in the numbers and turn the crank."
When the task ís an unfamiliar problem, however, students must determine
what knowledge they will use. If the task appears to cal! for Procedural Jenow/edge
and no available procedure fits the problem situation exactly, then modifications
in selected Procedural Jenowledge may be necessary. In contrast to executing, then,
imp/ementing requires some degree of understanding of the problem as well as of
the solution procedure. In the case of implementing, then, to understand conceptual
knowledge ís a prerequísite lo being able to app/y procedura/ knowledge.
In executing, a student routinely carries out a procedure when confronted with
a farrtiliar task (Le., exereíse). The familiarity of the situation often provides suf-
ficient dues to guide the choice of the appropriate procedure to use. Executing
is more frequently associated with the use of skills and algorithms than with
techrtiques and methods (see our díscussion of Procedural know/edge on pages
52-53). Skills and algorithmshave two qualities that make them particularly
amenablt! to executing. First, they eonsist of a sequence of steps that are gener-
ally followed in a fixed order. Second, when the steps are performed correctly,
the end result is a predetermined answer. An altemative term for executing is
carrying out.
SAMPLE OB.JECTIVES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS Inexecut-
ing, a student ís faced with a farrtiliar task and knows what to do in order to
complete it. The student simply carries out a known procedure to perform the
task. For example, a sample objective in elementary level mathematics could
be for students to leam to divide one whole number by another, both with mul-
típle digits. The instructions to "divide" signify the division algorithm, which
is the necessary Procedural Jenow/edge. To assess the objective, a student is given
a worksheet that has 15 whole-number division exercises (e.g., 784/15) and is
asked to find the quotients. In the natural sciences, a sample objective could be
78 Section n The Revised Taxonorny Structure
to learn to compute the value of variables using scientific formulas. To assess
the objective, a student is given the formula Density = Mass/Volume and must
answer the question "What is the density of a material with a mass of 18
pOllllds and a volume of 9 cubic inches?"
ASSESSMENT FORMATS In executing, a student is given a familiar task thal
can be performed using a well-known procedure. For example, an execution
task is "Solve for x: X2 + 2x - 3 = O using the lechnique of completing the
square." Students may be asked to supply the answer or, where appropriale,
select from among a set of possible answers. Furthermore, because the empha-
sis is on the procedure as well as the answer, students may be required not only
to íllld the answer bul also to show their work.
3.2 IMPLEMENTING
Implementing occurs when a student selects and uses a procedure to perform an
unfamiliar task. Because selection is required, students must possess an under-
standing oí the type of problem encountered as well as the range of procedures
that are available. Thus, implementing is used in conjunction with other cogni-
tive process categories, such as Understand and Create.
Because the studenl is faced with an unfamiliar problem, he or she does no!
irnmediately know which of the available procedures to use. Furthermore, no
single procedure may be a "perfect fit" for the problem; sorne modification in
the procedure may be needed. lmplementing is more frequently associaled with
the use of techniques and methods than wilh skills and algorithms (see the dis-
cussion of Procedural Icnowledge on pages 52-53). Techniques and methods have
two qualities thal make them particularly amenable lo implementing. First, the
procedure may be more like a "flow chart" than a fixed sequence; lhat is, the
procedure may have "decision points" bullt inlo it (e.g., afler completing Step 3,
should I do Step 4A or Step 4B?). Second, there often is no single, fixed answer
that is expecled when the procedure is applied correctly.
The notion of no single, fixed answer is especially applicable to objectives
that call for applying conceptual Icnowledge such as theories, models, and struc-
tures (subtype Ce), where no procedure has been developed for the applica-
tion. Consider an objective such as "The student shall be able to apply a social
psychological theory of crowd behavior to crowd control." Social psychologi-
cal theory is Conceptual not Procedural Icnowledge. This is clearly an Apply objec-
tive, however, and there is no procedure for making the application. Given that
the theory would very clearly structure and guide the student in the applica-
tion, this objective is just barely on the Apply side of Create, but Apply it is. So it
would be classified as implementing.
To see why it fits, think of the Apply calegory as struclured along a contin-
uum. It starts with the narrow, hlghly structured execute, in which the known
Procedural knowledge is applied almost routinely. It continues through the
broad, increasingly unstruc!ured implement, in which, at the beginning, the pro-
cedure must be selected lo fil a new situation. In the middle of the category, the
4. ANALYZE
Chapler 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 79
procedure may have to be modified to implement it. At the far end of implement-
ing, where there is no set Procedural Icnowledge to modify, a procedure must be
manufactured out of Conceptual Icnowledge using theories, models, or structures
as a guide. So, although Apply is closely linked to Pracedural Icnowledge, and this
linkage carries through most of the category of Apply, there are sorne instances
in implementing to whlch one applies Conceptual knowledge as well. An alterna-
tive term for implementing is using.
SAMPLE OB.lECTIVES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In math-
ematics, a sample objective could be to learn to solve a variety of personal
finance problems. A corresponding assessmenl is to presenl students with a
problem in which they must choose the most economical financing package for
a new caro In Ihe nalural sciences, a sample objective could be lo learn to use
the most effective, efficient, and affordable melhod of conducting a research
sludy to address a specific research question. A corresponding assessment is to
give students a research question and have Ihem propose a research study Ihat
meets specified criteria of effectiveness, efficiency, and affordability. Notice lhat
in both of these assessment tasks, Ihe sludenl musí not only apply a procedure
(i.e., engage in implementing) but also rely on conceptual understanding of Ihe
problem, the procedure, or both.
ASSESSMENT FORMATS In implementing, a sludent is given an unfamiliar
problem that must be solved. Thus, most assessmenl formats begin with speci-
fication of Ihe problem. Students are asked to delermine the procedure needed
lO solve the problem, solve the problem using the selected procedure (making
modifications as necessary), or usually bolh.
Analyze involves breaking material into its constituenl parts and determining
how the parts are relaled to 0l"\e another and to an overall structure. This process
calegory includes Ihe cognitíve processes of differentiating, organizing, and at-
tributing. Objectives classified as Analyze inc!ude learning to determine the rele-
vanl or imporlanl pieces of a Illessage (differentiating), the ways in which Ihe
pieces of a message are organized (organizing), and the underlying purpose of
the message (attributing). Although learning to Analyze may be viewed as an
end in itself, it is probably more defensible educationally to consider analysis as
an extension of Understanding oc as a preJude lo Evaluating oc Creating.
Improving students' skills in analyzing educational communications is a
goal in many fields of study. Teachers of science, social studies, Ihe humarúties,
and Ihe arts frequently give "learning to analyze" as one of Iheir important ob-
jectives. They may, for example, wish to develop in Iheir students Ihe ability to:
• distinguish facl from opinion (or reality from fantasy);
• connect conclusions with supporting slatements;
80 Section 11 TIte Revised Taxonomy Structure
• distinguish relevant from extraneous material;
• determine how ideas are related to one anolher;
• ascertain lhe unstated assumptions involved in what is said;
• distinguish dominant from subordinate ideas or lhemes in poetry or
music; and
• find evidence in support of lhe aUlhor' s purposes.
The process categories of Understand, Analyze, and Evaluate are interrelated
and often used iteratively in performing cognitive tasks. At lhe same time,
however, it is important to maintain them as separate process categories. A per-
son who understands a communieation may not be able lo analyze it wel!. Sim-
i1arly, someone who is skillful in analyzing a communicabon may evaluate
il poorly.
4.1 DIFFERENTIATING
Differentiating involves distinguishing lhe parts of a whole strueture in terms of
their relevance or importance. Differentiating occurs when a student diserimi-
nates relevant from irrelevant informabon, or important from unimportant in-
formation, and then atlends to the relevant or important information. Differen-
tiating is different from the cognibve processes associated with Understand
because it involves structural organization and, in particular, determining how
lhe parts fit into lhe overal! structure or whole. More specifically, differentiating
differs from comparing in using lhe larger context to determine what is relevant
or important and what is no!. For instanee, in differentiating apples and oranges
in lhe eontext of fruit, internal seeds are relevant, but color and shape are irrele-
vant. In comparing, al] of lhese aspects (i.e., seeds, color, and shape) are relevant.
Alternative terms for differentiating are discriminabng, selecting, disbnguish-
ing, and foeusing.
SAMPLE OBJECTIVES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In the
social sciences, an objecbve could be tO.learn to determine the major points in
researeh reports. A eorresponding assessment item requires a student to cirele
lhe main points in an archeological report about an ancient Mayan city (sueh
as when lhe city began and when it ended, the population of the city over lhe
course of its existenee, lhe geographic location of lhe city, the physical build-
ings in lhe city, its economic and cultural funebon, lhe social organization of
the city, why lhe city was built and why it was deserted).
Similarly, in the natural scienees, an objeebve could be to select lhe main
steps in a written description of how something works. A corresponding assess-
men! item asks a student lo read a chapter in a book lhat describes Iighlning for-
mation and lhen to divide lhe process into major steps (ineluding moist air rising
to form a eloud, creabon of updrafts and downdrafts inside lhe eloud, separation
of charges within the eloud, movement of a stepped leader downward from
cloud to ground, and ereabon of a return stroke from ground to cloud).
4.2 ORGANIZING
Chapter 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 81
Finally, in malhemabcs, an objective could be to distinguish between rele-
vant and irrelevant numbers in a word problem. An assessment item requires a
student to circle the relevant numbers and eross out lhe irrelevant numbers in
a word problem.
ASSESSMENT FORMATS Differentiating can be assessed wilh construeted
response or seleebon tasks. In a eonstructed response task, a student is given
some material and is asked to indicate which parts are most important or rele-
vant, as in this example: "Write lhe numbers lhat are needed to solve this prob-
lem: Peneils come in paekages lhat contain 12 each and cost $2.00 eaeh. John
has $5.00 and wishes to buy 24 pencils. How many packages does he need to
buy?" In a selection task, a student is given some material and is asked to
choose which parts are most important or relevant, as in lhis example: "Which
numbers are needed to solve this problem? Pencils come in packages lhat con-
tain 12 eaeh and eost $2.00 each. John has $5.00 and wishes to buy 24 peneils.
How many packages does he need to buy? (a) 12, $2.00, $5.00, 24; (b) 12, $2.00,
$5.00; (e) 12, $2.00, 24; (d) 12,24."
Organizing involves identifying the elements of a eommunication or situation
and reeognizing how they fit togelher into a eoherent structure. 1n organizing, a
student builds systematic and coherent connections among pieces of presented
information. Organizing usually occurs in conjunetion wilh differentiating. The
student fust identifies lhe relevant or important elements and then determines
the overall structure within which lhe elements fi!. Organizing can also occur in
conjunetion wilh attributing, in which the focus is on determining lhe aulhor's
intention or point of view. A1ternative terms for organizing are structuring, inte-
grating, fmding coherence, outlining, and parsing.
SAMPLE OaJECTIVES AND CORRE'SPONDING ASSESSMENTS Inorga-
nizing, when given a description of a situation or problem, a student is able to
idenbfy lhe systernatie, coherent relationships among relevant elements. A
sample objective in social studiescould be to learn to slructure a historical de-
scription into evidenee for and against a particular explanation. A correspond-
ing assessment item asks a student to write an outllne lhat shows which facts
in a passage on American history support and which faets do not support !he
conelusion lhat the American Civil War was caused by differences in lhe rural
and urbim composition of lhe North and Soulh. A sample objective in lhe nat-
ural scienees could be to learn to analyze research reports in terms of four sec-
lions: hypothesis, method, data, and eonc1usion. As an assessment, students
are asked to produce an outllne of a presented research repor!. 1n malhematics,
a sample objective could be to leam to outline textbook lessons. A correspond-
ing assessment task asks a student to read a textbook lesson on basic statistics
and lhen generate a matrix lhat includes each statisbc's name, formula, and lhe
conditions under which il is used.
82 Section II The Revised Taxonomy Structure
ASSESSMENT FORMATS Organizing involves imposing a structure on ma-
terial (such as an outline, table, matrix, or hierarchical diagram). Thus, assess-
ment can be based on constructed response or selection tasks. In a constructed
response task, a student may be asked to produce a written outline of a pas-
sage. In a selection task, a student may be asked to select which of four alterna-
tive graphic hierarchies best corresponds to the organization of a presented
passage.
4.3 ATTRIBUTING
Attributing occurs when a student is able to ascertain the point of view, biases,
values, or intention underlying communications. Attributing involves a process
of deconstruction, in which a student determines the intentions of the author
of the presented material. In contrast to interpreting, in which the student seeks
to Understand the meaning of the presented material, attributing involves an
extension beyond basic understanding to infer the intention or point of view
underlying the presented material. For example, in reading a passage on the
battle of Atlanta in the American Civil War, a student needs to determine
whether the author takes the perspective of the North or the South.
An alternative term is deconstructing.
SAMPLE OBJECTIVES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In
attributing, when given information, a student is able to determine the under-
Iying point of view or intention of the author. For example, in literature, an ob-
jective could be to leam to determine the motives for a series of actions by char-
acters in a story. A corresponding assessment task for the students having read
Shakespeare's Macbeth is to ask what motive(s) Shakespeare attributed to Mac-
beth for the murder of King Duncan. In social studies, a sample objective could
be to leam to determine the point of view of the author of an essay on a contro-
versial topic in terms of his or her theoretical perspective. A corresponding as-
sessment task asks a student whether a report on Amazon rain forests was
written from a pro-environment or pro-business point of view. This objective is
also applicable to the natural sciences. A corresponding assessment task asks a
student to determine whether a behaviorist or a cognitive psychologist wrote
an essay about human learning.
ASSESSMENT FORMATS Attributing can be assessed by presenting sorne
written or oral material and then asking a student to construct or select a
description of the author's or speaker's point of view, intentions, and the like.
For example, a constructed response task is "What is the author's purpose in
writing the essay you read on the Amazon rain forests?" A selection version
of this task is "The author's purpose in writing the essay you read is to: (a)
provide factual information about Amazon rain forests, (b) alert the reader to
the need to protect rain forests, (c) demonstrate the economic advantages of
developing rain forests, or (d) describe the consequences to humans if rain
forests are developed." Alternatively, students might be asked to indicate
whether the author of the essay would (a) strongly agree, (b) agree, (c) neither
5. EVALUATE
5.1 CHECKING
Chapter 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 83
agree nor disagree, (d) disagree, or (e) strongly disagree with several state-
ments. Statements like "The rainforest is a unique type of ecological system"
would follow.
Evaluate is defined as making judgments based on criteria and standards. The
criteria most often used are quality, effectiveness, efficiency, and consistency.
They may be determined by the student or by others. The standards may be
either quantitative (i.e., ls this a sufficient amount?) or qualitative (i.e., ls this
good enough?). The standards are applied to the criteria (e.g., ls this process
sufficiently effective? ls this product of sufficient quality?). The category Evalu-
ate includes the cognitive processes of checking Gudgments about the internal
consistency) and critiquing Gudgments based on external criteria).
It must be emphasized that not all judgments are evaluative. For example,
students make judgments about whether a specific example fits within a cate-
gory. They make judgments about the appropriateness of a particular proce-
dure for a specified problem. They make judgments about whether two objects
are similar or different. Most of the cognitive processes, in fact, require sorne
form of judgment. What most clearly differentiates Evaluate as defined here
from other judgments made by students is the use of standards of performance
with clearly defined criteria. ls this machine working as efficiently as it should
be? ls this method the best way to achieve the goal? ls this approach more cost
effective than other approaches? Such questions are addressed by people en-
gaged in Evaluating.
Checking involves testing for internal inconsistencies or fallacies in an opera-
tion or a producto For example, checking occurs when a student tests whether or
not a conclusion follows from its premises, whether data support or disconfirm
a hypothesis, or whether presented material contains parts that contradict one
another. When combined with planning (a cognitive process in the category
Create) and implementing (a cognitive process in the category Apply), checking'
involves determining how well the plan is working. Alternative terms for
checking are testing, detecting, monitoring, and coordinating.
SAMPLE OBJECTIVES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In check-
ing, students look for internal inconsistencies. A sample objective in the social
sciences could be to leam to detect inconsistencies in persuasive messages. A
correspondiflg assessment task asks students to watch a television advertise-
ment for a political candidate and point out any logical flaws in the persuasive
message. A sample objective in the sciences could be to leam to determine
whether a scientist' s conclusion follows from the observed data. An assessment
task asks a student to read a report of a chemistry experiment and determine
whether or not the conclusion follows from the results of the experimento
84 Section Il The Revised Taxonomy Structure
ASSESSMENT FORMATS Checking tasks can involve operations or products
given to the students or ones created by the students themselves. Checking
can also take place within the context of carrying out a solution to a problem
or perforrning a task, where one is concemed with the consistency of the
actual implementation (e.g., ls this where 1 should be in Ught of what I've done
so far?).
5.2 CRITIQUING
Critiquing involves judging a product or operation based on extemally im-
posed criteria and standards. In critiquing, a student notes the positive and neg-
ative features of a product and makes a judgment based at least partly on those
features. Critiquing Ues at the core of what has been called critical thinking. An
example of critiquing is judging the merits of a particular solution to the prob-
lem of acid rain in terms of its likely effectiveness and its associated costs (e.g.,
requiring all power plants throughout the eountry to restrict their smokestack
emissions to certain limits). An alternative terrn is judging.
SAMPLE OB.JECTIVES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In cri-
tiquing, students judge the merits of a product or operation based on speci-
fied or student-deterrnined criteria and standards. In the social sciences, an
objective could be to leam to evaluate a proposed solution (such as "eliminate
aU grading") to a social problem (sueh as "how to improve K-12 edueation")
in terms of its likely effectiveness. In the natural sciences, an objective could
be to leam to evaluate the reasonableness of a hypothesis (such as the hypoth-
esis that strawberries are growing to extraordinary size because of the un-
usual alignment of the stars). Finally, in mathematics, an objective could be lo
leam to judge which of two altemative methods is a more effeclive and effi-
cient way of solving given problems (such as judging whether it is better to
find aH prime faclors of 60 or to produce an algebraic equation to solve the
problem "What are the possible ways you could multiply two whole numbers
to get 601").
ASSESSM ENT FORM ATS A student may be asked to eritique his or her own
hypotheses or ereations or those generated by someone else. The critique could
be based on positive, negative, or both kinds of criteria and yield both positive
and negative consequenees. For example, in critiquing a school distric!'s pro-
posal for year-round sehools, a student would generate positive eonsequenees,
such as the elimination of leaming loss over summer vacation, and negalive
consequences, such as disruption of family vacations.
6. CREATE
Create involves putting elements together to form a coherent or functional
whole. Objeetives classified as Crea te have studenls make a new product by
mentaUy reorganizing some elements or parts into a pattem or structure not
c1early present before. The processes involved in Create are generally coorcli-
r
Chapler 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 85
nated with the studen!' s previous leaming experiences. Although Create
requires creative thinking on the part of the student, this is nol completely
free ereative expression unconstrained by the demands of the learning task or
situation.
To some persons, creativity is the production of unusualproducts, oiten as
a result of some special skill. Crea/e, as used here, however, although it inc1udes
objectives that caU for unique production, also refers to objeetives ealling for
production that all students can and will do. If nothing else, in meeting these
objeetives, many students will crea te in the sense of produeing their own syn-
thesis of inforrnation or materials to forrn a new whole, as in writing, painting,
sculpting, building, and so on.
Although many objectives in the Crea te category emphasize originality (or
uniqueness), educators must define what is original or unique. Can the term
unique be used to describe the work of an individual student (e.g., "This is
unique for Adam Jones") or is it reserved for use with a group of students (e.g.,
"This is unique for a fifth-grader")? It is important to note, however, that many
.objectives in the Crea te category do not rely on originality or uniqueness. The
teaehers' intent with these objectives is that students should be able to synthe-
size material into a whole. This synthesis is oflen required in papers in which
the student is expected to assemble previously taught material into an orga-
nized presentation.
Although the process categories of Understand, Apply, and Analyze may
involve detecting relationships among presented elements, Create is different
because it also involves the construction of an original product. Unlike Create,
the other categories involve working with a given set of elements that are part
of a given whole; that is, they are part of a larger structure the student is trying
to understand. In Create, on the other hand, the student must draw upon ele-
ments from many sources and put them together int" a novel structure or pat-
tem relative to his or her own prior knowledge. Create results in a new prod-
uct, that is, something that can be observed and lhat is more than the student's
beginning materials. A task that requires Create is likely to require aspects of
eaeh of the earlier cognitive process categories to sorne extent, but not neces-
sarily in the order in whieh they are Usted in the Taxonomy Table.
We recognize that eomposition (including writing) oiten, but not always,
requires the cognitive processes associated with Crea te. For example, Create is
not involved in writing that represents the remembering of ideas or the inter-
pretation of materials. We also recognize that deep understanding that goes
beyond basic understanding can require the cognitive processes associated
with Create. To the extent that deep understanding is an act of construetion or
insight, the eognitive processes of Create are involved.
The creative process can be broken into three phases: problem representa-
tion, in which a student attempts to understand the task and generate possible
solutions; solution planning, in whieh a student examines the possibilities and
devises a workable plan; and sol ution execution, in which a student success-
fully carries out the plan. Thus, the creative process can be thought of as start-
ing with a divergent phase in which a variety of possible solutions are consid-
ered as the student attempts to understand the task (generatíng). This is foUowed
86 Section J] The Revised Taxonorny Structure
by a convergent phase, in which the student devises a solution method and
turns it into a plan of aetion (planning). Finally, the plan is executed as the stu-
dent constructs the solution (producing). It is not surprising, then, that Create is
associated with three cognitive processes: generating, planning, and producing.
6.1 GENERATING
Generating involves representing the problem and arriving at alternatives or
hypotheses that meet certain criteria. Often the way a problem is initially rep-
resented suggests possible solutions; however, redefining or coming up with a
new representation of the problem may suggest different solutions. When gen-
erating transcends the boundaries or constraints of prior knowledge and exist-
ing theories, it involves divergent thinking and forms the core of what can be
called creative thinking.
Generating is used in a restrieted sense here. Understand also requires gen-
erative processes, which we have induded in translating, exemplifying, summa-
rizing, inferring, classifying, comparing, and explaining. However, the goal of Un-
derstand is most often convergent (that is, to arrive at a single meaning). In
contrast, the goal of generating within Crea te is divergent (that is, to arrive at
various possibilities). An alternative term for generating is hypothesizing.
SAMPLE OSJECTIVE AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENT Ingenerat-
ing, a student is given a description of a problem and must produce alternative
solutions. For example, in the social sciences, an objective could be to learn to
generate multiple useful solutions for social problems. A corresponding assess-
ment item is: "5uggest as many ways as you can to assure that everyone has
adequate medical insurance." To assess student responses, the teacher should
construct a set of criteria that are shared with the students. These might
indude the number of alternatives, the reasonableness of the various alterna-
tives, the practicality of the various alternatives, and so on. In the natural
sciences, an objective could be to learn to generate hypotheses to explain ob-
served phenomena. A corresponding assessment task asks students to write as
many hypotheses as they can to explain strawberries growing to extraordinary
size. Again, the teacher should establish dearly defined criteria for judging the
quality of the responses and give them to the students. Finally, an objeetive
from the field of mathematies could be to be able to generate alternative meth-
ods for achieving a particular resulto A corresponding assessment item is:
"What alternative methods could you use to find what whole numbers yield
60 when multiplied together?" For each of these assessments, explicit, publidy
shared scoring criteria are needed.
ASSESSMENT FORMATS Assessing generating typically involves con-
strueted response formats in which a student is asked to produce alternatives
or hypotheses. Two traditional subtypes are consequences tasks and uses tasks.
In a consequences task, a student must list all the possible consequences of a
certain event, such as "What would happen if there was a flat income tax rather
Chapter 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension 87
than a graduated income tax?" In a uses task, a student must list all possible
uses for an object, such as "What are the possible uses for the World Wide
Web?" It is almost impossible to use the multiple-choiee format to assess gener-
ating processes.
6.2 PLANNING
Planning involves devising a solution method that meets a problem's criteria,
that is, developing a plan for solving the problem. Planning stops short of
carrying out the steps to create the actual solution for a given problem. In
planning, a student may establish subgoals, or break a task into subtasks to be
performed when solving the problem. Teachers often skip stating planning
objectives, instead stating their objectives in terms of producing, the final stage
of the creative process. When this happens, planning is either assumed or
implicit in the producing objective. In this case, planning is likely to be carried
out by the student covertly during the course of constructing a product (Le.,
producing). An alternative term is designing.
SAMPLE OBJECTIVES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In plan-
ning, when given a problem statement, a student develops a solution method.
In history, a sample objeetive could be to be able to plan research papers on
given historical topies. An assessment task asks the student, prior to writing a
research paper on the causes of the American Revolution, to submit an out1ine
of the paper, including the steps he or she intends to follow to conduct the
research. In the natural sciences, a sample objeetive could be to learn to design
studies to test various hypotheses. An assessment task asks students to plan a
way of deterrnining which of three faetors determines the rate of oscillation of
a pendulum. In mathematics, an objective could be to be able to layout the
steps needed to solve geometry problems. An assessment task asks students to
devise a plan for determining the volume of the frustrum of a pyramid (a task
not previously considered in dass). The plan may involve computing the vol-
ume of the large pyramid, then computing the volume of the small pyramid,
and finally subtraeting the smaller volume from the larger.
ASSESSMENT FORMATS Planning may be assessed by asking students to
develop worked-out solutions, describe solution plans, or select solution plans
for a given problem.
6.3 PRODUCING
Producing involves carrying out a plan for solving a given problem that meets
certain specifications. As we noted earlier, objectives within the category Cre-
ate may or may not indude originality or uniqueness as one of the specifica-
tions. 50 it is with producing objectives. Producing can require the coordination
of the four types of knowledge described in Chapter 4. An alternative term is
constructing.
ss Section II The Revised Taxonomy Structure
SAMPLE OBJECTIVES AND CORRESPONDING ASSESSMENTS In pro-
ducing, a sludent is given a functional descriplion of a goal and must create a
product that salisfies the description. It involves carrying out a solution plan
for a given problem. Sample objectives involve producing novel and useful
products that meel certain requirements. In history, an objective could be to
leam to write papers pertaining to particular historical periods that meet speci-
fied standards of scholarship. An assessment task asks students to write a short
story that takes place during the American Revolution. In science, an objective
could be to learn to design habitats for certain species and cerlain purposes. A
corresponding assessment task asks sludents to design the living quarters of a
space slation. In English lileralure, an objective could be lo learn lo design seIs
for plays. A corresponding assessment lask asks sludenls lo design lhe sel for a
sludenl production of Driving Miss Daisy. In all these examples, lhe specifica-
tions become the crileria for evalualing sludenl performance relative lo the ob-
jective. These specifications, then, should be induded in a scoring rubric !hat is
given to the sludents in advance of the assessment.
ASSESSMENT FORMATS A common task for assessing producing is a de-
sign task, in which students are asked to create a product that corresponds to
certain specifications. For example, students may be asked to produce
schematic plans for a new high school that indude new ways for students to
conveniently store their personal belongings.
DECONTEXTUALIZED AND CONTEXTUALIZED COGNITIVE PROCESSES
We have examined each cognitive process in isolation (i.e., as decontexlualized
processes). In the next section we examine the processes within the context of a
particular educational objective (i.e., as conlexlualized processes). In this way, we
are reuniting cognilive processes wilh knowledge. Unlike deconlexlualized
processes (e.g., planning), conlexlualized processes occur within a specific aca-
demic conlexl (e.g., planning the composition of a literary essay, planning to solve
an arithmetic word problem, or planning lo perform a scientific experiment).
Although it may be easier to focus on deconlexlualized cognitive proc-
esses, two findings from research in cognilive science poinl lo lhe imporlanl
role of conle"l in learning and thinking (Bransford, Brown, and Cocking, 1999;
Mayer, 1992; Smith, 1991). Firsl, research suggesls !hal lhe nalure of the cogni-
tive process depends on lhe subject matter to which il is applied (Bruer, 1993;
Mayer, 1999; Pressley and Woloshyn, 1995). For example, learning to plan solu-
tions lo malhematics problems is different from learning lo plan the composi-
lion of lilerary essays. Consequently, experience in planning in malhematics
does nol necessarily help a studenl leam to plan essay compositions. Second,
research on authentic assessmenl suggesls thal the nature of a process depends
on the aulhenticily of the task to which it is applied (Baker, O'Neil, and Linn,
1993; Hambleton, 1996). For example, learning to generale writing plans (with-
out aclually writing an essay) is different from learning to generate plans
within the context of aclually producing an essay.
Chapter 5 The Cognitive Process Dimension S9
Although we have described the cognitive processes individually, they are
likely to be used in coordination with one another lo facililate meaningful
schoollearning. Most authentic academic lasks require the coordinated use of
several cognitive processes as well as several types of knowledge. For exam-
pie, lo solve a mathematical word problem, a sludent may engage in:
• interpreting (to undersland each senlence in the problem);
• recalling (lo relrieve lhe relevant Factual knowledge needed lo solve the
problem);
• organizing (to build a coherent representation of the key information in the
problem, that is, Conceptual knowledge);
• planning (to devise a solution plan); and
• producing (to carry out the plan, that is, Procedural knowledge) (Mayer, 1992).
Similarly, to write an essay, a sludent may engage in:
• recalling (to retrieve relevant information !hat may be induded in the essay);
• planning (to decide whal lo indude in the essay, delermine whal to say,
and how to say it);
• producing (to create a written product); and
• critiquing (to make sure the written essay "makes sense") (Levy and Rans-
dell, 1996).
AN EXAMPLE OF EDUCATIONAL OSJECTIVES IN CONTEXT
In simplesl terms, our revised framework is intended to help teachers teach,
leamers leam, and assessors assess. Suppose, for example, that a teacher has a
very general objective for her sludents: She wants them to leam aboul Ohm's
law. She devises an inslructional unit accordingly. Because of the vagueness of
the objective, this unit potentially indudes all four types of knowledge: Factual,
Conceptual, Procedural, and Metacognitive. An example of Factual knowledge is
that current is measured in amps, voltage in volts, and resistance in ohms. An
example of Procedural knowledge is the steps involved in using the formula for
Ohm's law (voltage = current X resistance) to compute a numerical value.
Although these two types of knowledge are the most obvious to indude in
fuis unit, a deeper understanding of Ohm's law requires the other two types of
knowledge: Conceptual and Metacognitive. An example of Conceptual knowledge
is the slructure and workings of an electrical circuit thal consisls of batteries,
wires, and a lighl bulbo An electrical circuit is a conceplual syslem in which
there are causal relations among the elemenls (e.g., if more batteries are added
in serial, lhe voltage increases, which causes an increase in the flow of electrons
in lhe wires as measured by an increase in current). As an example of Meta-
cognitive knowledge, lhe teacher may intend sludents to know when to use
mnemonic stralegies for memorizing the name of the law, the formula, and
similar relevant iterns. She also may want them to establish their own goals for
learning Ohm's law and its applications.
90 Section TI The Revise<! Taxonomy Structure
REMEMBERING WHAT WAS LEARNED
A resmcted set of objectives for Ihe unil on Ohm' s law could focus solely on pro-
moting retention. Objeclives for promoting relenlion are based primarily on Ihe
cognitive process category Remember, whieh indudes recal/ing and recognizing fac-
tual, procedural, conceptual, and metacognitive knowledge. For example, an objective
for recaUing factual kn(JWledge is !hat students will be able lo recaIl what !he letters
stand for in Ihe fonnula for Ohm's law. An objective for recal/ing procedural kn(JWI-
edge is !hal students will be able lo recaU!he steps involved in applying Ohm's law.
Allhough Ihese are Ihe obvious kinds of retention-type objectives to in-
elude in Ihe unil, it is also possible lo develop retention-type objectives Ihat
involve Conceptual and Metacognitive knowledge. For Conceptual knowledge, an
objective is !ha! students will be able to draw, from memory, a picture of an
electrical circuit. Because !his objective focuses on recaUing, eaeh studen!'s
drawing is evaluated in lerms of how dosely it corresponds to a picture pre-
sen!ed in Ihe textbook or previously on Ihe chalkboard. Students may answer
questions about Conceptual and Metacognitive knowledge in a rote mallOer, rely-
ing exelusively on previously presented material. When Ihe overall purpose of
Ihe unit is to promote transfer of leaming, Remember objectives need to be sup-
plemented wilh objectives Ihat involve more complex cognitive processes.
Finally, an objeetive pertaining to reca/ling metacognitive knowledge is Ihat
students remember "When stuck in a hole, stop digging." In o!her words, when
Iheir first approaeh lO solving a problem or arriving al an answer is not succeed-
ing, they remember to stop and assess olher possible approaehes. Again, wi!h
Ihe emphasis on Remember, students may be queried about whelher, when Iheir
firsl approaeh to a problem bogged down, Ihey remembered Ihe slogan. If stu-
dent answers are being graded, students will give the response Ihey know Ihe
teaeher desires (Le., "Of eourse, 1 did"), so this assessment task works only
where students realize its purpose is to help !hem improve Iheir leaming.
MAKING SENSE OF AND USING WHAT WAS LEARNED
When Ihe eoncem of Ihe teacher turns to promoting transfer, he or she needs to
consider Ihe full range of cognitive process categories. Consider Ihe myriad of
possibilities inherent in Ihe following lisl:
• An objective for interpreting factual knowledge: "Students should be able to
defme key terms (e.g., resistance) in Iheir own words."
• An objective for explaining conceptual kn(JWledge: "Students should be able
to explain what happens to the rate of current in an electrical circuit when
ehanges are made in Ihe system (e.g., two batteries !hat were collOected in
serial are recollOected in parallel)."
• An objective for executing procedural knowledge: "The student will be able
to use Ohm's law to compute the voltage when given Ihe current (in
amperes) and Ihe resistance (in ohms)."
• An objective for differentiating conceptual kn(JWledge: "The student will be
able to determine whieh infonnation in word problerns involving Ohm's
CONCLUSION
Chapler 5 The Cognitive Process Dirnension
91
law (e.g., wattage of light bulb, thickness of wire, voltage of battery) is
needed to determine !he resistance."
• An objeetive for checking procedural knowledge: "The student will be able to
determine whelher a worked-out solution to a problem involving Ohm's
law is likely lO be effective in solving it."
• An objective for critiquing metacognitive kn(JWledge: "The student will be
able to ehoose a plan for solving problems involving Ohm's law Ihat is
most consistent wilh his or her current level of understanding."
• An objective for generating conceptual knowledge: "The student will be able
to generate altemative ways of increasing Ihe brightness of Ihe light in a
eircuit without changing Ihe battery."
We can summarize the entire set of objeetives in this instruetional unit on
Ohm's law using Ihe Taxonomy Table (see Table 5.2). The Xs indicate objectives
Ihat are induded in Ihis unít based on the examples we gave. Not all cells are
filled; !hus, not all possible combinations of cognitive process and knowledge
are induded in the unit. Nonelheless, it is elear !hat !he unit indudes a variety
of objectives Ihat go beyond remember factual knowledge. Our focus on objectives
in instructional units suggests Ihat the most effective way of teaching and as-
sessing educational objectives may be to embed Ihem within a few basic con-
tex!s (such as an instructional unit) ra!her !han to focus on each in isolation. We
return to this !heme la ter.
A majar goal of this chapter is to examine how teaching and assessing can be
broadened beyond an exclusive focus on Ihe cognitive process Remember. We
described 19 specific cognitive processes associated wilh six process calegories.
Two of Ihese cognitive processes are associated with Remember; 17 are assoei-
ated with Ihe process categories beyond il: Understand, Apply, Analyze, Evalu-
ate, and Create.
Our analysis has implications for bo!h teaching and assessing. On !he teach-
ing side, two of Ihe cognitive processes help to promote retention of learning,
whereas 17 of Ihem help to foster transfer of learning. Thus, when !he goal of in-
struction is to promote transfer, objectives should indude Ihe cognitive processes
associated wilh Understand, Apply, Analyze, Evaluate, and Create. The descriptions
in this chapter are intended to help educators generate a broader range of educa-
tional objectives Ihat are likely to result in bolh retention and transfer.
On !he assessment side, our analysis of cognitive processes is intended to
help educators (including test designers) broaden their assessments of leam-
ing. When the goal of instruclion is to promote transfer, assessment tasks
should lap cognitive processes Ihal go beyond remembering. Allhough assess-
ment tasks that tap recalling and recognizing have a place in assessment, these
tasks can (and often should) be supplement~d wilh Ihose Ihat tap Ihe full range
of cognitive processes required for transfer of leaming.
5.2 COMPLETED TAXONOMY TABLE FOR HYPOTHETICAL
OHM'S LAW UNIT
SECTION 111
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION 1. REMEMBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLY 4. ANALYZE s.
EVALUATE
6 .
CREATE
A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
X X
The Taxonomy in Use
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
X X X
X
C.
PROCEDURAL
)(NOWLEDGE
X X X
D.
META-
COGN.TIVE
KNOWLEDGE X X
93
CHAPTER G
Using the Taxonomy Table
In this major section we demonstrate how educators can use the Taxonomy
Table to help teachers and other educators in at least three ways. First, it can
help them gain a more complete understanding of their objectives (both those
they choose for themselves and those that are provided by others); that is, the
table can help educators answer what we refer lo as the "learning question"
(see page 6). Second, from this understanding, teachers can use the table to
make better decisions about how to teach and assess their students in terms
of the objectives; that is, the table can help educators answer the "inslruction
question" and the "assessment question" (see pages 7-8). Third, it can help
them determine how well the objectives, assessments, and instructional ac-
tivities fit together in a meaningful and useful way; that is, the table can help
educators answer the "alignment question" (see page 10). In this initial chap-
terwe address these questions in the context of an example that involves the
teaching of science to illustrate how using the Taxonomy Table can help
educators.
USING THE TAXONOMY TABLE IN ANALYZING YOUR OWN WORK
Before we revisit the Taxonomy Table and explore how it can be helpful, we
have an important word for leachers who are planning to use the framework
to guide the development of curriculum units: Your use of the framework will
be less complex than what is presented in this and the following chapters be-
cause we are analyzing units prepared by others. This requires us to take the
stance of an observer attributing intended meaning to objectives, inslructional
activities, and assessments. The result appears complicated because we make
hypotheses about what was meant and then we have to check them against
other evidence for confirmation.
As an example, we interrupt the narrative of Chapter 8, the first vignette,
with analyses that make trial inferences about what Ms. Nagengast, the
teacher, meant by cerlain actions so that we can relate them to the Taxonomy. If
Ms. Nagengast had done the analysis herself, the vignette would have looked
quite different and been much simpler. It would also have been less inslructive
about the Taxonomy framework, however (which is why we didn't present it
95
-
96 Section III The Taxonorny in Use
fuat way). The trial inierenees illustrate the distinctions among categories and
show how fue various categories are used.
If she were doing the analysis herseIf, Ms. Nagengast wouId have an inter-
nal idea of what she is seeking to teach. Then fue framework wouId become a
reference to use as she develops fue unit. As part of the unit development
process, she wouId reflect on her actions and decisions by answering questions
such as fuose !hat follow.
"In stating my objective, do the words I use describe what I intend?" A
teacher may use the word "explainll when she does not mean lito construct a
causal model" (our definition). Rather, she might mean interpret or surnma-
rize. Alfuough all three of these cognitive processes are in the category Under-
stand, fue choice of one over fue other has different implieations for instruction
and assessment. Using fue Taxonomy's terms can add precision.
"Is fue objective that can be inferred from my instructional activities con-
sistent wifu my statement of fue objective?" When bofu objectives and instrue-
tional aetivilies are translated into fue Taxonomy framework, do fuey point to
fue same types of knowledge and fue same cognitive processes? Several factors
can guide a teacher's choice of instructional activities. Are students interested
in fuem? Do fuey enjoy fuem? Are they likely to engage in fuem? Do 1 have fue
resources I need to support fuem (e.g., fue equipment needed for a laboratory
experiment)? If aetivities are selected mainly on these criteria, fueir link with
fue stated objeetive may beeome eroded. Thus, inferring objeetives from in-
structional activities and relating fuem to fue intended objective are fue means
to ensure that instructional activities are "on target."
"Are my assessments valid?" When one c1assifies fue assessments in fue
Taxonomy framework, do fuey align with fue stated objectives? At fue very
least, validity means that fue assessment used by the teacher provides him or
her wifu information about how well fue students achieved (or are achieving)
the objective. Inferences about objectives based on assessments can come from
two sources. The fust is the actual assessment tasks (e.g., test items, project di-
reetions). This source is sufficient when seleet-type formats with correct an-
swers are used (e.g., multiple choice, matching). The second souree is fue erite-
ria used to score or evaluate student performance on fue assessment tasks (e.g.,
scoring keys, rating scales, scoring rubrics). This source becomes neeessary
when extended-response formats are used (e.g., essays, research reports). The
question here is whefuer inferences based on fue assessments lead baek to the
stated objectives.
USING THE TAXONOMY TABLE IN ANALY:Z:ING THE WORK OF OTHERS
When anyone uses fue framework to analyze fue work oí ofuers, fueyencounter
the same eomplexities we faced in our vignelte analyses. Teachers may be
handed objectives (e.g., state or local standards) or assessments prepared by
ofuers (e.g., statewide or standardized tests). They may be asked to analyze an-
other teacher's units or conduet observations in fellow teaehers' cIassrooms.
These analyses all require attributions of intent, wlúch are diffieult when objec-
Chapler 6 Using the Taxonomy Table 97
tives lack important words or phrases or when peripheral words or phrases are
misleading. Even !he key words and phrases do not always mean what they
seem to mean. In addition, words (i.e., fue statement of fue objective) and ac-
tions (i.e., the instructional activities and assessments related to fue objective)
may be inconsistent. For all fuese reasons, plaeing an objeetive in fue Taxonomy
Table requires fuat one determine fue intentions of fue teacher [or aufuor(s) in
fue case of materials prepared by ofuers] in relation to fue meaning of fue objec-
tive, fue purpose of fue instructional activities, and fue aim of fue assessments.
On page 34, we stated that the use of multiple sourees of information is
Iikely to result in the most valid and defensible c1assification of objectives. In
the next seetion we begin to explore why this is so.
THE TAXONOMY TABLE REVISITED
The two-dimensional Taxonomy Table, shown eadier as Table 3.1, is repro-
duced on fue inside front eover of this book. Tables 4.1 and 5.1, wlúch sumnia-
rize fue knowledge and cognitive process dimensions, are printed on fue front
and back covers, respectivelyand on fue next page. We encourage you to refer
to these tables wlúle reading !he remainder of this chapter.
THE LEARNING QUESTION
Let us begin wilh a seemingly straightforward objective: "Students shouId
leam to use laws of electricity and magnetism (such as Lenz' law and Ohm's
law) .lo solve problems." To place this objective in fue Taxonomy Table, we
must examine the verb and noun phrase in relation to the eategories of the
table. Specifieally, we must relate fue verb, "use," to one of fue six majar eogni-
tive process categories and Ihe noun phrase,
"Iaws of electricity and magnet-
ism," to one of fue four types of knowledge. The verb is fairly easy: "use" is an
alternative name for implement (see inside back cover), wlúch is associated wifu
the category Apply. Wifu respect to fue noun, laws are principIes or generaliza-
tions, and knowledge of principIes and generalizations is Conceptual knowledge.
If our analysis is correet, Ihen, this objective shouId be placed in fue cell of fue
Taxonomy Table Ihat corresponds to fue intersection of Apply and Conceptual
knowledge (cell B3; see Table 6.LNote in Table 6.1 !hat fue four types of knowl-
edge form the rows labeled A through D, and !he six processes form the
columns labeled 1 through 6. A eell can !hus be designated by a lelter and a
number to indicate its intersection of a row and a calumn). Now we have an-
swered fue "Iearning question." We want students to learn to apply concep/ual
knowledge.
In fuis analysis we relied on knowledge subtypes (e.g., knowledge of princi-
pIes und generaliza/ions) and specific eognitive processes (e.g., implementing)
rafuer than on fue four majar types of knowledge and fue six cognitive process
categories. Based on our collective experience, we believe subtypes and specific
processes provide the best cIues to fue proper placement of objectives in the
Taxonomy Table. Note also that we based our decisions on assumptions we
6.1 PLACEMENT OF THE OBJECTIVE IN THE TAXONOMY TABLE
Chapter 6 Using fue Taxonomy Table 1111
THE COGNITIVE PROC:ESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
1. REMEMBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3. AppL,Y 4. ANALYZE S. EVALUATE 6.
CREATE
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Objective
C.
PROCI!DURAL
KNOWLEDGE
D.
META-
COGNITIVE
KNQWLI!DGI!
~~~tiv e = the objective, "Students should leam to use laws of electricity and magnetisrn (such as Lenz' 1aw and Olun's law) to solve
problems."
made about the teacher's inlention. For example, our inference that we are
dealing with implementing ealher !han executing is suppoeted not onJy by the in-
clusion of Ihe verb "use" bul also by fue phrase "in problems" in Ihe slatement
of Ihe objective. Because peoblems are unfamiliar (eathee than familiar) tasks
(see page 77), implementing seems moee appropriate Ihan executing (see inside
back covee).
THE INSTRUC:TION qUEsTION
Although the objective can be cJassified in one cell (see Table 6.1), when we
considee different inslructional activities a teachee may use, we see a much
more complex and differentiated picture. For example, in general, if sludenls
are to implement scientific laws, they might (1) determine Ihe type of problem
Ihey are confronting, (2) select a law Ihat willlikely solve that type of problem,
and (3) use a procedure in which Ihe law is embedded lo solve Ihe problem. As
we described on pages 78-79, then, implementing involves bolh Conceptual
knowledge (i.e., knowledge of Ihe type oc category of problem) and Procedural
knuwledge (Le., knowledge of Ihe steps lo follow lo solve Ihe problem). Instruc-
tional activities DÚght help sludenls develop bolh types of knowledge.
Note Ihe verbs used in the decomposition of this single objective: "de-
termine," "select," and lJuse." From Tabie 5.1, inside back cover, we see that de-
lermining thal something belongs to a category is the definition of c1assifying
(Understand), selecting is an altemative term foe differentiating (Analyze), and
using is an altemative term foe implementing (Apply). The instructional activi-
ties should help sludents engage in c1assifying and differentiating as well as
implementing.
Because sludents may make errors in classifying, differentiating, and imple-
menting, it also seems eeasonable to emphasize Metacognitive knowledge during
instruction. For example, students might be taughl stralegies foe monitoring
their decisions and choices to see whethee they "make sense." "How do 1 know
this problem is a ceetain type?" "If it is, how do 1 know which laws to use?" In
addition to being able to recall these stralegies, sludents may be taughl to im-
plement Ihem.
Finally, il may be advisable to focus sorne of Ihe instructional activities on
so-called higher-order cogniti"e processes. Because implementation often in-
volves making choices along the way, students should be taught lo check as
Ihey go and critique Ihe final eesult oc solution. 60th checking and critiquing fall
in Ihe Evaluate category.
The answer to the "instruction question," then, is fae moee complicated
that it would appear to be at fust blush. Instructional activities might provide
oppoetunities foe sludents lo develop at least theee types of knowledge (Con-
ceptual, Procedural, and Metacognitive) and engage in at least six cognitive
processes (recalling, classifying, differentiating, implementing, checking, and
critiquing) associated with five process categories (Remember, Understand, Ap-
ply, Analyze, and Evaluate). An analysis of the instructional activities in teems
of the Taxonomy Table, then, eesults in many more cells being included (see
Table 6.2).
6.2
PLACEMENT OF THE OB.JECTIVE ANO INSTRUCTIONAL
ACTIVITIES IN THE TAXONOMY TABLE;.
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION t. REMEMBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLV 4. ANALYZE s. EVALUATE 6.
CREATE
A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Activity 1 Objective Activity2 Activity 7
c.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLB'DGE
Activity 3 Activity6
D.
META-
COGNITIVE
KNOWLEDGE Activity4 Activity 5
Key.
Objective = the objective, "Students should learo to use laws oi electricity and magnetism (such as Lenz' law and Ohm's law) to solve
problerns. 'I
Activity 1 = activities intended to help students classify types oí problems
Activity 2 = activities intended to help students select appropriate laws
Activity 3 = activities intended to help students implement proper procedures
Activity 4 = activities intended to help students recall metacognipve strategies
Activity 5 = activities intended te help students implement metacognitive strategies
Activity 6 = activities intended ta he!p students check their implcmentation ef the procedure
Activity 7 = activities intended to help students critique the correctness of their solution
Chapter 6 Using!he Taxonomy Table 101
An examination of the relationshíp of the single cel! that contains the ob-
jective (ID) to the seven cells that contain the instructional activities (82, 84, 85,
C3, CS, 01, and 03) produces an interesting result; namely , none of the instruc-
tional activities pertains directly to the objective. The reason for this is dear
from our definition of Apply (see inside back cover). Apply means to carry out
or use a procedure in a given situation. In other words, Apply requires Proce-
dural knowledge. Therefore, if laws of electricity and magnetism (Conceptual
knowledge) are to be applied, they must be embedded within a procedure (Pro-
cedural knowledge). The procedure typicany "unpacks" the laws in a way that
facilitates their application (e.g., first, calculate or estimate the electromotive
force in volts; second, calcula te or estimate the eurrent in amperes; third, divide
the eleetromotive force by the current to yield the resistanee). Earlier consider-
ation of the relationshíp between Apply and Procedural knowledge might have
suggested that we initiany dassify the objeetive as apply procedural knowledge
(C3) instead of apply conceptual knowledge (83).
THE ASSESSMENT qUEsTION
Suppose a teacher has spent several days of instruction on this objective and
wants to know how wel! her students are leaming. She has a number of deci-
sions to make, induding these three important ones: Ooes she foeus her assess-
ment only on the een that contains the objective, or does she assess the effee-
tiveness of the various instructional activities as well? Ooes she integrate
assessment with her instruction (Le., formative assessment), or does she eon-
duct a more independent assessment for the purpose of assigning grades (Le.,
summative assessment)? How does she know that her assessment tasks require
the students to engage in implementing rather than executing (or sorne other eog-
nitive proeess)?
FOCUSED VERSUS DISTRIBUTED ASSESSMENT Our initial analysis,
based solely' on the statement of the objective, suggests lhat the teacher focus her
assessment on the extent to which students have learned to apply conceptual
knowledge (cen 83). In contrast, our more detailed analysis, based on relevant and
appropriate instructional activities, suggests the teacher assess the wide variety
of cells reJated to attaiIting the p~iinary objective (B2, 84, 85, C3, CS, 01, and 03).
The trade-off seems to be breadth versus depth. On the one hand, the focused as-
sessment permits the teacher , to probe the depths of student leaming relative to a
single objective. A variety of different problems related to tlris objective can be
induded on a single assessmen!. On the other hand, a more distributed assess-
ment permits the teaeher to examine broadly the processes involved in the at-
tainment of the target objective, The broader testing not only assesses the pri-
mary objective in the context of reJated knowledge and cognitive processes, but
also may permit a diagnosis of the student's underlying difficulties where, for
example, a contributing aspect of Procedural knowledge is not adequately leomed.
FORMATIVE VERSUS SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT Fonnative assessment
is coneerned with gathering information about learning as learning is taking
t02 Sectíon In The Taxonorny in Use
place, so that "in-flight" instructional modifications may be rnade to improve
the quality or amount of learning. In contrast, surnmative assessment is con-
cerned with gathering information about learning after the learning should
have occurred, usually for the purpose of assigning grades to students. Thus,
formative assessment is used primarily to improve student leaming; surnma-
tive assessment is used prirnarily to assign grades. Class work and homework
are often used in formative assessment; more formal tests are used as a means
of surnrnative assessment.
ASSESSING IMPLEMENTING VERSUS EXECUTING Because implementing
and executing are both associated with Apply, it is important to distinguish be-
tween them if the results of the assessment are to be valido If assessment laSks do
not inc1ude unfamiliar lasks andlor do not require students to select relevant and
appropriate Procedural knowledge, then it is more likely that executing rather than
implementing is being assessed. As we mentioned in the discussion of interpreting
(see page 71), using assessment tasks that are new to the student is a primary
method of ensuring that students respond to the assessments at the most com-
plex cognitive process called for in Ihe objective.
ASSESSMENT AND THE TAXONOMY TABLE Continuing with our exam-
pie, let us suppose that the teacher decides she is as concemed about students
using the correct procedure as she is about their getting the right answer. The
teacher sees the assessment as formative in nature. She gives her students ten
electrical and mechanical problems and asks them to salve each problem,
showing Iheir work.
As we did for Ihe objective and the instructional activities, we can examine
the assessment in terms of the Taxonomy Table. In this case, we would focus on
the assigned point values. For each of the ten problems, score points are given
for "selecting a correct procedure." The teacher's scoring rubric requires that
students are able to c1assify the problem correctly (understanding conceptual
knowledge, one pOint), select the appropriate law (analyzing conceptual knowledge,
one point), and select a procedure that follows from the law and is likely to
solve Ihe problem (analyzing procedural knowledge, one point). Since she consid-
ers Ihe procedure and Ihe result to be equally important, having given three
points foi seleeting the correet procedure for solving each problem, she gives
three points for arriving at Ihe correct solution to the problem (Le., implementing
procedural knowledge). Once again, Ihe results of our analysis can be sumrnarized
in terrns of Ihe Taxonomy Table (see Table 6.3).
THE ALIGNMENT QUESTION
Since the entries in Tables 6.1 and 6.2 are reproduced in Table 6.3, we can address
the alignrnent question by focusing on Table 6.3. Specifically, one can examine the
cells lhat contain the objeetive, the instructional ai:tivities, the assessments, and
various combinations of these. Cells that contain an objective, one or more in-
structional activities, and sorne aspect of assessment indicate a hlgh degree of
alignrnent. In contrast, cells lhat contain only Ihe objective or only an instructional
6.3 PLACEMENT OF THE OB.JECTIYE, INSTRUCTIONAL
ACTIYITIES, AND ASSESSMENT IN THE TAXONOMY TABLE
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE I
KNOWLEDGE 1. DIMENSION
REM~MBI!R
2. UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLY 4. ANALYZE 5. EVALUATE 6.
CREATE
A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE Activity 1 Test lA Objective Activity Z
Test lB
Activity 7
c.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE Activity 3 Test 2 [Objective as
Refocused- See page 104]
Test 1 e
Activity 6
D.
META-
COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDGE Activity4 Activity 5
~~ective = the objcctivc, "Students should leam to use laws of electricity and magnetism (such as Lenz' law and Ohm's law) to solve
problems."
Activity 1 = activities intended to help students classify types Di problems
Activity 2 = activities intended to help students select appropriate laws
Activity 3 = activities intended to help students implement proper procedures
Activity 4 = activities intended to help students recall metacognitive strategies
Activity 5 = activities intended to help shldents implement metacognitive strategies
Activity 6 = activities intended to help students check their implementation of the procedure
Activity 7 = activities intended to help students critique the correctness of their solution
Test lA, Test lB, Test le = cells associated with !he procedural aspect of each problem, Test 2 = cell associated with!he corree! "answer"
104 Section nI The Taxonorny in Use
aetivity or only sorne aspect of assessment indicate weak alignment. This inter-
pretation, however, requires that a basic assumption be made. Because the com-
pleted table represents our inferences, we must assume that we rnade reasonably
valid inferences on the statement of objective, our analysis of the instructional ac-
tivities, and our examination of the assessment. This assumption enables us to
differentiate misclassification from misalignment.
If we assume correct classification from these three sources (i.e., the state-
ment of objective, the instructional activities, and the assessment), then Table
6.3 presents evidence of both alignment and misalignment. For example, cell
C3 (apply procedural knowledge) includes both an instructional activity and a
score point on the assessment. If the objective were properly classified, in line
with our earlier discussion, this would increase the alignment. Similar align-
ment appears in cells B2 and B4, which also contain an instructional activity
and a score point on the assessment.
At the same time, looking at Table 6.3, we see misalignment, which ap-
pears to stem from three sources.
o Having a "disconnect" between the verb and noun in the statement of the
objective. "Use," being an alternative term for implement, is associated
with the category Apply (see the inside back cover). Procedural knowledge
is typically associated with Apply. We approaehed the analysis of the noun
phrase "Iaws of electricity and magnetism" with this in mind. Thus, rather
than focusing on knowledge of "Iaws" as Conceptual knowledge (whieh it
is), we should focus on procedures for using the laws to solve problems-
Procedural knowledge. In light of this "re-focus" on the procedures instead
of the laws, the objective should be classified in cell C3 (apply procedural
knowledge), rather than in cell B3 (apply conceptual knowledge). That classi-
fication gives the strongest possible alignment in cell C3: The objective,
instructional activity, and assessment would all be present there.
o Including instructional activities that are not assessed and thus provide no
information for the diagnosis of learning problems. Examples in Table 6.3
include ACT4 (remembering they should check their progress as they work
on eaeh problem), ACT6 (determining whether their progress is satisfac-
tory),ACT5 (rnaking modifications based on their "progress ehecks," if
needed), and ACT7 (ehecking the accuracy of their final solution). All four
relate to the process of reviewing work "in progress." Simply asking stu-
dents whether they had done the reviews would reinforce the importanee of
doing so. Furthermore, individually querying those students who reported
reviewing but still arrived at the wrong solution might help them find mis-
takes in their own work and how they typica11y atlack such problems.
o Awarding points (ce11 C4) based on the problem-solving process that ei-
ther was not emphasized during the instructional activities or, if it was,
was not linked with any stated objective.
Based on the analysis using the Taxonomy Table, the teacher can make
changes in the statement of the objective, the instructional activities, or the as-
sessment tasks or evaluation criteria to increase the overall alignment.
Chapter 6 Using the Taxonomy Table 105
PROBLEMS IN CLASSIFYING OB..JECTIVES
Because the classification of objectives, whether the objectives are stated, im-
plicit in instructional activities, or deduced from assessments, requires lhal in-
ferences be made, there are many instances in which the classification is not
easy. The editors of the original Handbook noted problems inherent in the clas-
sification of objectives. We pose these problems as questions:
o Am 1 working at the level of specificily at which the Taxonomy Table is
most useful?
o Have 1 made correct assumptions about studenls' prior leaming?
o Does the objective as slaled describe an intended leaming result, not activ-
ities ar behaviors that are "means to an end"?
THE LEYEL OF SPECIFICITY PROBLEM
As we discussed on page 15, educational objeclives can be writlen at three lev-
els of specificity. They can be general program goals to be achieved over ayear
or a number of years, objectives for a particular course or unit within a course,
or objectives for a particular lesson within a unit (Krathwohl, 1964; Krathwohl
and Payne, 1971). The Taxonomy is designed lo be most useful in planning in-
struetion and assessmenl at the course or unil level. As we demonstrate in the
vignette analyses, however, the Taxonomy has implieations for learning activi-
ties and assessment lasks at the daily lesson level as well.
A useful test of the specificity of an objective is to ask whether, after having
read it, you can visualize the performance of a student who has achieved it.
"Whal would a student have to do to demonstrate that he or she has learned
what 1 intended him or her to learn?" If you envision a variety of different per-
formances, you probably ought to ask, "What performance is the most repre-
sentative of lhe achievement of this objective?" Discerning this central perfor-
mance narrows broad objectives down to the more specific ones lhal are
needed to use the Taxonomy Table.
Consider, for example, this global objective: "The student should learn lo
be a good citizen in a democracy." What pictures come to mind when you try
to visualize the actions of a sl~dent who has maslered lhis global objective?
Probably lots of things: Voting? Protection of minority viewpoints? Acceplance
of majority rule? Each óf these suggests a more specific objective thal, in com-
bination, could help the student move toward the broad citizenship goal. An
example mighl be: "The student willlearn a variety of strategies for resolving
group conflicts (e.g., voting, mediation)." The somewhat more specific objec-
tives are the most appropriale for use with the Taxonomy Table.
THE PRIOR LEARNING PROBLEM
To classify an objective correctly, one must make assumptions about studenls'
prior learning. This is most obvious when a student experiences an inslruc-
lional activity or assessment task thal he or she has encountered before. In sueh
-
106 Section III The Taxonorny in Use
cases, an aetivity or task fuat is intended to evoke a more eomplex eognitive
process (e.g., Analyze) will not do so because fue student has only to Remember
fue prior experienee. If we intend students to leam to Analyze, we must do
what we can lo ensure fua! instruetional aetivities and assessments evoke Ihe
complex processes intended.
In fue same vein, an objeetive may fail inlo differenl eognitive proeess cale-
gories with inereasing grade levels. What is a more eomplex objeetive in the
early grades may beeome a less eomplex objective in later grades. For example,
a mathematies objeelive in grade 3 Ihal requires differentiating in order lo
painstakingly sorl oul whal is needed lo solve a particular problem Iype may
require in grade 4 implementing beeause fue identifieation of !hal problem type
has beeome routine. By grade 5, Ihis same objective may require executing be-
cause problem solution is almosl aUlomatie, and by grade 6, Ihe objeetive may
require simple recalling because a1l fue eommon problem types likely to be used
in instruetion and assessmenl have already been eneountered.
Thus, lo reaeh agreement about the classifieation of objeetives, teaehers
musl have sorne knowledge or make an assumption about the students' prior
learning. This is probably the single most eommon and most diffieult problem
to overcome when trying lo classify an objeetive in Ihe abstraet wifuoul refer-
enee lo any specifie group and/or grade level or when using the Taxonomy
Table wifu no information provided aboul students' prior learning.
DIFFERENTIATING OBJECTIVES FROM ACTIVITIES
In working with the Taxonomy Table, one somelimes finds (as fuose of us who
worked on this projeel oflen did) fual il is easy to slip into the mode of trying
to calegorize learning aetivities rather Ihan inlended learning ouleomes. To lest
the framework, one of us would suggest a verb-for instanee, "estimaling"-
and ask where it belongs. Irutially, we found Ihat eslimaling was diffieult to
eategorize. When we paired it with knowledge so Ihal it beeame an objeelive,
however, dassifying beeame mueh easier. Consider the following: "Studenls
shouId learn lo estimale the product of two large numbers." This objective re-
duces lo studenls learning a three-step procedure: (1) rounding lo the nearesl
power of len, (2) muItiplying fue remaining one-digit, non zero numbers, and
(3) adding the correct number of zeros. In this eontext, estimating means exe-
cuting an estimation procedure, or applying pracedural /cnawledge.
Sometimes one of us wouId suggesl a silly activity like "doodling" and ask
where il wouId fil. Not only is "doodling" unJikely lo appear in an edueational
objeetive, bul if it were to appear, il once again would have lo be in a knowl-
edge conlexl lo be dassifiable. For example, "The sludent will leam thal doo-
dling helps him or her lo relieve stress lemporarily when working on diffieult
problems." This might be a strategy within Metacognitive knowledge. The phrase
"leam Ihat" suggests simple recaU (i.e., "know Ihal"). The objective, then,
would take the form remember metacognitive knowledge. The point is that it
rnakes sense lo try lo d assify "doodling" when it is plaeed in a knowledge eon-
text; without !hat eontext, it makes no sense.
Chapter 6 Using!he Taxonomy Table 107
We have one final point in this regard: Many "verbs," partieuIarly fuose as-
sociated with undesirable sludent behavior (e.g., disrupt, agitate), are not
likely to be induded in statements of edueational objectives. Consequently,
!hey are not usefuJly dassified within our framework.
SOME HELPFUL HINTS
In light of the problems and based on our eombined experienee in fue field, we
offer four helpful hints that shouId inerease your probabiJity of classifying ob-
jeetives correctly: (1) eonsider the verb-noun eombination, (2) relate fue knowl-
edge type to the proeess, (3) make sure you have the right noun or noun
phrase, and (4) rely on multiple sourees.
CONSIDER THE VERB-NOUN COMBINATION
As we mentioned earlier, verbs by themselves can be misleading. Consider this
objeetive: "Students should be able to identify various literary devices (e.g.,
similes, metaphors, hyperbole, personifieation, alliteration) used in novels."
Clearly, fue verb is "identify." In Table 5.1, inside back eover, identifying is an
altemative term for recognizing, which is in the process category Remember. If
we categorized this as a Remember objective, however, it would be inappropri-
ate. A more complete reading of this objective suggests !hat the intention is for
sludents to learn to identify examples of literary devices in novels. Finding ex-
amples is exemplifying, which is associated with the processcategory Under-
stand. This inference is consistent with the fact lhat literary devices are concepts
(!hat is, dasses of things sharing cornmon attributes). More likely, then, the ob-
jective has the form understand conceptual /cnowledge.
RELATE TYPE OF KNOWLEDGE TO PROCESS
For objeetives that involve Remember, Understand, and Apply, !here generally is
a direct correspondence between process category and type of knowledge. We
do intend, for example, studenls to recall facts (remember factual /cnawledge), in-
lerpret principIes (understand cQnceptual /cnawledge), and execute algorithms (ap-
ply procedural knowledge).
When Analyze, Evaluate, and Crea te are involved, however, the correspon-
denee between process calegory and type of knowledge is less predictable.
Consider, for example, evaluate conceptual /cnawledge. We typicaily do not intend
studenls lo leam to critique (Eva/uate) a sel of crileria (Conceptual /cnowledge).
Rather, we intend fuem lo leam to critique something based on or in terms of
the crileria. The something mighl be a hypothesis advaneed by a scientist or a
solution to a problem proposed by a legislator. The crileria on which fue evalu-
ation is based may indude reasonableness and cosl effectiveness, respectively.
Thus, evaluate conceptual knowledge beeomes in essence evaluate [based on] con-
ceptual know/edge or eva/uate [in lerms of] conceptual /cnowledge.
108 Section ID The Taxonorny in Use
Now eonsider Create. Again, we intend for students to leam to crea te
something-poems, novel solutions to a problem, researeh reports. Students
typieally are expected to rely on more lhan one type of knowledge during lhe
creative process. Suppose, for example, we intend for students to leam to write
original research reports about famous Americans in history based on themes
and supporting details derived from materials about lhem. We could classify
this objective as Create (write original research reports) Conceptual know/edge
(themes) and Factual knowledge (supporting details). This classification would
be not only eonfusing but also likely incorreet. We do not necessarily intend for
students to ereate conceptual and factual knowledge. However, we do intend lhem
to ereate [original research reports based on] conceptual and factual knowledge. As
in lhe preceding case of Evaluate, students are to Crea te somelhing based on
sorne knowledge. Wilh Crea te, studenls may well use all lhe knowledge al lheir
disposal (Factual, Conceptual, Procedura/, and Me/acognitive).
The point here is simple but importan!. When objectives involve the three
mosl complex cognitive processes, knowledge provides lhe basis for lhe eogru-
tive processes and often multiple types of knowledge are required. This idea is
exemplified in several of lhe vignettes.
MAKE SURE YoU HAVE THE RIGHT NOUN
As we worked wilh various drafts of the Taxonomy Table, we eneountered
statements of objectives in which the nouns and noun phrases did nol help us
delermine Ihe appropriate type of knowledge. In general, lhe verbs in Ihese ob-
jectives indicaled more complex cognitive process categories (Le., Ana/yze,
Eva/uate, and Crea te). Consider lhe following examples:
• Studenls should learn to outline textbook lessons.
• Students should leam lo critique proposed solutions lO social problems.
• Students should learn lo design sets for various plays.
In each case, lhe verb is easily identifiable and quile easily classified. Outlining
is an altemative lerm for organizing [Ana/yze], critiquing is associated wilh Eval-
uate, and construcling is an altemalive term for producing [Create]. The noun
phrases in Ihese cases are "textbook lessons," "proposed solutions to social
problems," and "seIs for various plays." What is missing from lhese state-
ments, and what musí be made explicit before lhe objectives can be classified
correctly, is lhe knowledge lhat sludents need lo organize lessons (e.g., lhe or-
ganizing principies), critique proposed solutions (e.g., the evaluation crileria),
or plan seIs (e.g., the design parameters).
Now consider a second set of objectives:
• Students should leam to analyze in a work of art lhe relationship of lhe
materials used lo lhe rendition of color.
• Students should learn to evaluate commercials seen on lelevision or read
in newspapers/ rnagazines from !he standpoinl of a set of principIes per-
taining to uappeals."
Chapler 6 Using!he Taxonomy Table 109
• Studenls should leam lo design habitats for eertain species so lheir
survival is ensured.
Like !he objectives in lhe fusl set, these three objectives are ~onc~med ,,:ilh An-
a/yze, Eva/uate, and Create, respectively. Unlike Ihe obJecllVes m the Ílrst set,
however, Ihe knowledge needed is contained in !he obJecllVes (as underlmed).
In !he first objective, studenls need knowledge of !he relationship of Ihe male-
rials used to Ihe rendition of color. In Ihe second objective, students need
knowledge of Ihe set of principies perlaining lO "appeals." Finally, in Ihe lhird
objeetive, sludents need sufficient knowledge of a particular speCles so Ihey
can design a habitat to ensure Iheir survival. The point here .IS th~t not all
nouns and noun phrases provide useful clues lo Ihe proper classlficahon of Ihe
objective in terms of the knowledge componen!. Particularly for objecti~e.s !hat
focus on developing more complex cognitive processes, Ihe clues pertammg to
knowledge may be found in:
• the definition or description of Ihe cogrutive process itself (see, for exam-
pie, our discussion of differentiating on pages 80-81); and /or
• Ihe evaluation criteria or scoring rules used wilh Ihe assessmen!.
If clues are not given in eilher of these sources, !hen there is a need to further
c1arify, or spell out, !he knowledge in !he statement of !he objective.
RELY ON MULTIPLE SOURCES
As we began to analyze Ihe vignettes, we learned that our understanding of Ihe
objectives of the uníl inereased as we considered multiple SOUTces: Ihe state-
ments of Ihe objectives, Ihe instructional aetivities, an~ Ihe assessment ta~ks
and evaluation criteria. This was particularly important m !hose cases m whieh
one or more of !he stated objectives was a bit vague or more global than !hose
we could classify easily. The vaJue of multiple sources will be seen in Ihe vi-
gnettes. Before we move to the individual vignettes, however, w:, explore ~
the next chapter how Ihe vignettes were put togelher, what they Iook hke,
and how Ihey were analyzed.
CHAPTER 7
Introduction to the Vignettes
Based in large measure on our collective experiences in working with the origi-
nal Handbook, we believe that a framework such as the Taxonomy Table requires
numerous illustrations and a great deal of discussion before it can be adequately
understoad and ultimately used in classroom settings. To this end, we have de-
veloped six vignettes (see Table 7.1).
In combination, the vignettes were selected to ground the propositions
advanced in the eadier chapters and to illustrate the key concepts and ele-
ments in the Taxonomy Table. The purpose of this chapter is to characterize
the vignettes in our colleetion, spell out their central components, and sug-
gest ways in whieh the Taxonomy Table ean be used lo aid in understanding
the complex nature of classroom instruction. With increased understanding
may come opportunities lo improve the quality of instruction provided in our
classrooms.
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE VIGNETTES
It is instruetive to begin with whal the vignettes are not. Firsl, they do not nec-
essarily represenl "best practice," excellent teaching, or models oE instruction
for others lo adopt or emula le. Looking at lhe vignettes in such an evaluative
light willlikely undermine our purpose for including them in this volume. We
urge readers lo suspend their need to evaluale and instead see the vignettes as
a collection of teaehing episodes within larger eurrieulum units written by
leachers.! The question for the reader is not whelher the vignettes represent
good or bad teaching. Rather, the question is how the Taxonomy Table can help
the reader make sense of the objeetives, inslructional activities, and assess-
ments described by the teachers with the intent of improving their own teach-
ing and the students' leaming.
I Chapter 12, the Volcanoes? Here? vignette, was taught by an experienced. teacher, hut the vignette
was prepared by Dr. Michael Smith, who observed the teacWng as part of a National Sdence Fo\.U\-
dation study.
110
Chapter 7 Inlroduclion lo Ihe Vignettes 11 1
TABLE 7.1 Our Collection ofVignettes
CHAPTER NUMBER
TITLE GRADE LEVEL.(S) SUBJECT AREA
8
9
10
11
12
13
Nutrition 5 Health
Macbelh 12 English literature
Addition Facts 2 Mathematics
Parliamentary Acts 5 History
Volcanoes? Here? &-7 Science
Reporl Writing 4 Language arts
Second, these vignettes eertainly do nol represent al1 approaches to class-
room instruction at aII grade levels in al1 subject matters in all countries of the
world. Stated somewhat differently, the eollection is intended to be illustrative,
not exhaustive. However, we believe lhat our analysis of the vignettes can en-
able readers to analyze their own and others' learning expectations, instruc-
tion, and assessment, and to consider alternative approaches lo instruction and
assessmenl lhat may be more appropriate and effeclive in light of what stu-
dents are expected lo leam.
Having discussed what the vignettes are not, we now turn to what they
are. First, and perhaps mosl important, the \<ignettes are real. They represent
currículum units taught in American schools by practicing teachers. The initial
drafts of these vignettes varied from being fairly brief to quite expansive-
almost 20 pages. Because of space limitations, the longer vignettes were ediled.
Nonetheless, they all contain essential descriptions of curriculum units told in
the language of the teachers who taught them.
Second, the vignettes represent high levels of verisimilitude. They capture
sorne of Ihe complexity, ambiguity, and problematic nature of classroom in-
struction. These qualities should add to the wonderment the reader brings to
the descriptions and allow us to show the usefulness oE the Taxonomy Table.
. Simple linear teaching over extremely short periods of time requires litUe in the
way of analysis.
Third, we asked the teachers to describe curriculum units, rather than
briefer one- or two-day lessons. Our rationale for this decision is presented in
the next section.
THE CURRICULUM UNIT
A curriculum unit consists of one or more educational objectives that require
approxirnately two to three weeks to achieve. If there is more than one educa-
tional objective, the objectives are related in sorne way, often in that they pertain
to the same topie (e.g., Chapter 8, Nutrition; Chapter 9, Macbeth; Chapter 12,
112 Section m The Taxonomy in Use
Volcanoes? Here?). Interdisciplinary units (e.g., a unit on airplanes involving Itis-
tory,. science, mathematics, and literature) and integrative units (e.g., Chapter 11,
Parliamentary Acts; Chapter 13, Report Writing) are also examples of curricu-
lum units. Wilhin a curriculum unit, Ihere may be several instructional ob-
jectives, each associaled wilh a lesson !hal lasls one, two, or perhaps three days.
In olher cases, no instructional objectives are stated (although they may be
implied).
A focus on curriculum units offers four advantages over a focus on daily
lessons. First, curriculum units pro vide Ihe time needed for more integrated,
holistic learning. Over time studenls can be helped to .see relationships and
connections among ideas, materials, activities, and topies; that is, the unit
structure helps Ihem see the forest as well as Ihe trees.
Second, curriculum units provide more flexibility in Ihe use of available
time. If a teacher runs out of time on a particular day, Ihe activity can be car-
ned out Ihe next day. The availability of "flexible time" in a curriculum unit is
important because, as we shall see in the vignettes, activities do not always go
as planned. In addilion, sorne sludenls may need more time lo learn than other
students. Curriculum units allow teachers to accommodate Ihese classroom
realities.
Third, curriculum units provide a conlext for interpreting daily objectives,
activities, and assessmenls. For example, the importance of a lesson on writing
declarative senlences is often better understood in Ihe context of a unit on writ-
ing paragraphs. Similarly, understanding the concepts of ratios and propor-
tions can be enhanced in the context of a unit on painting and sculplure.
Finally, Ihe larger curriculum units provide sufficient time for instructional
activities !hat allow for Ihe development and assessment of sludent learning of
more complex objectives. Objectives Ihat involve Ana/yze, Eva/uate, and Crea te
typically require longer time periods for sludents to learn.
CENTRAL COMPONENTS OF THE VIGNETTE DESCRIPTIONS
To provide a cornmon struclure, one that permits comparisons to be made
across Ihe vigneltes, each vignette begins with a description of Ihe classroom
context and then is divided into three major components: (1) objectives, (2) in-
structiona! activities, and (3) assessmen!. For each component a series of ques-
tlOns was wntten to guide teachers in Ihe preparation of Ihe vignettes.
For Ihe classroom context description and Ihe objectives component, our
questions included Ihe following:
• What are the unit objectives and how were they determined?
• How does the unit fit into the larger scheme of thlngs (e.g., statewide stan-
dards or testing program, district curriculum, prior and/or future units,
age or grade level of students)?
• What materials (e.g., texts, software, maps, videos) and equipment (e.g.,
computers, television, laboratory equipment) were available to you and
the sludents?
Chapter 7 Introduction lo !he Vignettes .,3
• How much time was allocated to Ihe unit? On what basis did you decide
on Ihe temporallength of Ihe unit?
For Ihe instructional activities component, we asked teachers questions
such as Ihe following:
• How was Ihe unit introduced to Ihe sludents (e.g., Was an overview of the
entire uni! given? Was the need for or purpose of Ihe unil discussed wilh
the students?)?
• In what activities were sludents engaged during Ihe uni!? Why were these
activities se!ected?
• What assignments were given to sludents? Why were specific assignments
selected?
• How did you monilor Ihe engagement and success of sludents in Ihe ac-
tivities and on Ihe assignments?
Finally, for the assessmen! componenl, we asked teachers to consider ques-
tions such as Ihese:
• How did you determine whelher students were, in facI, learning? How
did you assesS whal your sludenls leamed?
• Did you make use of rubrics, scoring keys or guides, criteria, and stan-
dards for judging Ihe quality of sludent work? If so, what were Ihey and
how were Ihey used?
• How did you infonn sludents aboul how welllhey were doing (or did) on
Iheunil?
• How were grading decisions made? What grading standards were used?
The teachers were toldo Ihat Ihe questions were guides, not requirements.
Even a cursory exarnination of Ihe vignettes will indicate !ha! our prompts were
used precisely in this way. Nol all of our questions were relevanl lo alI leachers,
and teachers did nol address Ihose Ihey believed to be irrelevant. Regardless of
Ihe questions considered, however, each teacher wrote a reasonably compre-
hensive account of each of Ihe four central components. In alI six vignettes, Ihe
components are p~esented and discussed in a fixed order: classroom context,
objectives, instructional activities, and assessment. .
We must emphasize Ihat thls order is not meant to convey a linear perspec-
tive on planning. We are well aware of Ihe research suggesting that teachers
often begin Iheir planning wilh instructional activities, not wilh objectives or
assessments. We assume Ihat planning might begin wilh any of the three com-
ponents: objectives, instruclional activilies, or assessment. Planning that is
"objective-driven" begins wilh specifying instructional objectives. "Activity-
driven" planning gives initial emphasis lo Ihe instructional activities. Finally, a
teacher operaling from a "test-driven" perspective starts wilh concerns for as-
sessment. Regardless of Ihe starting point, however, virtually alI teachers are also
concemed wilh Ihe olher two componenls as well as materials !hat are needed to
support Ihe activities and !he amount of time Ihal isavailable for Ihe uni!.
114 Section ID The Taxonomy ín Use
We anticipated that the description of instructional activities within the
unit might take different forms. One was to convey a day-to-day chronology of
events Ihat took place in Ihe classroom as Ihe unit progressed. Anolher possi-
bility was a little less sequential and more episodic, with descriptions of salient
events related to key issues and concerns. Most teachers chose combinations of
Ihese approaches, focusing on salient events within a chronological time frame.
USING THE TAXONOMY TABLE TO ANALYZE THE VIGNETTES
We began our analysis by reading through !he descriptions provided by the
teachers, searching for cIues Ihat would enable us to make sense of these de-
scriptions in the context of Ihe Taxonomy Table. Consistent wilh Ihe structure
of our objectives (see Chapter 2), Ihese cIues carne primarily from nouns and
verbs. As we demonstrated in Chapter 6, we used Table 4.1 (see also the front
inside cover) to make sense of the nouns we encountered and Table 5.1 (see
also the back inside cover) to help us wilh Ihe verbs.
The term c/ues in Ihe preceding paragraph is used intentionally. We were
never cerlain at any one time exactly where a specific descriptive element
fit within the Taxonomy Table. Sometimes our initial placement became in-
creasingly clear and more defensible the farther into the vignette we read. At
olher times later descriptions provided by Ihe teacher contradicted our initial
placemen!.
To understand our problem, consider Ihe following example. One of Ihe
stated objectives in Ihe Nutrition vignette (Chapter 8) is for students to "ac-
quire knowledge of a classification scheme of appeals Ihat describes !he com-
mon targets cornmerdal writers take into account in writing cornmercials." The
verb "acquire" is nowhere to be found in our list of cognitive processes. How-
ever,!he phrase "cIassification scheme" suggests Canceptual Knowledge. At this
pomt, we assumed Ihat "acquire" meant either Remember or Understand, and
we made our initial classification of Ihe objective in terms of the Taxonomy
Table, namely, remember or understand conceptual knowledge.
With this initial placement in mind, we moved on to Ihe description of Ihe
instructional activities. Early in Ihe unit, Ms. Nagengast, the teacher, presented
six "appeals" made by writers of cornmercials (i.e., ease, economy, health,
love/admiration, fear, and comfort/pleasure) and students were expected to re-
member Ihe names of Ihe six appeals. Because the emphasis is on Ihe names of
the appeals ralher !han on their underlying categories, we cIassified the intent
oí Ihis activity as remember factual knowledge. Note Ihat this emphasis on Factual
knowledge does not match our initial placement based on Ihe stated objective.
Shortly thereafter, however, students spent time with examples and nonexam-
pIes of each appeal and were asked to give examples to illustrate Iheir under-
standing. The use oí examples and nonexamples suggests two things: first, cat-
egories are being formed; second, students are engaged in exemplifying.
Bec:'use knowledge of categories is Conceptual knowledge and exemplifying is as-
sOClated wlth Understand, Ihe inferred objective would be classified as under-
stand conceptual knowledge. This inference is partially consistent with our initial
placement (with a focus on Understand rather!han Remember).
Chapler 7 lntroduction lo !he Vignetles 115
Finally, we moved on to assessment. Ms. Nagengast used two assessment
tasks wilh this objective. In Ihe first, she asked students to "identify a comrner-
dal, describe it, and Ihen attribute to Ihe commerdal writers what appeal [i.e.,
the type or category of appeal] they were working wilh." In Ihe second, she
asked students to "develop a claim for a given product that would match the
[type of] appeal she (lhe teacher) had advanced." To perform Ihese assessment
tasks well, students would need to do more than simply remember !he names
of Ihe six types oí appeals (i.e., remember factual knowledge). They would need to
understand each type (i.e., category) oí appeal in terms of its defining atlrib-
utes or features so they could correctly place new examples in the proper cate-
gory (task 1) or come up wilh new examples íor a given category (task 2). In
combination, Ihen, Ihe clues taken írom the objectives, instructional acti vities,
and assessments led us to believe!hat Ms. Nagengast's inlention is íor students
to learn to understand conceptual knowledge (i.e., ceH B2 oí Ihe Taxonomy Table).
In a similar way, we read each vignette component by componen!. In each
component, we paid particular atlention to those elemenls most likely to pro-
vide us wilh Ihe necessary clues. These elements are sumrnarized in Table 7.2.
In Ihe objectives component, we íocused on statements oí general purpose,
lists of included topics, and explicit objectives. In !he Parliamentary Acts vi-
gnette (Chapter 11), for example, Ihe teacher's general purpose ls to "integrate
students' persuasive writing with Iheir knowledge of historical persons and
events." The verb "integra te" and the noun phrases "persuasive writing" and
"knowledge oí historical persons and events"-provided clues to Ihe placement
of intended student learning in the Taxonomy Table. Similarly, in Ihe Volea-
noes? Here? vignette (Chapter 12), Ihe teacher indicates !hat Ihe unit was pred-
icated on the "dominant research paradigm in geology, Ihe Iheory oí plate tec-
tonics." In combination with Ihe unit title, this statement provides a c1ear
topical emphasis for Ihe unit~lhe role of plate tectonics in explaining voleanic.
activity. Topical emphases help us place objectives in the proper rows (i.e.,
TABLE 7.2 Elements Relevant to Taxonomic Analysis of the Vignettes
COMPONENT
ELEMENTS
Objectives
Instructional activities
Assessment
General purposes / aims
Stated objectives
Topics
Teachers'commenffi
Teachers'questions
Student assignments
Assessment tasks (e.g., test ítems, porÚolio requirements)
Scoring keys, guides, and rubrics
Evaluation criteria and standards
116 $ection III The Taxonomy in Use
types?f knowledge) of fue Taxonomy Table. Plaeement in fue proper eolumns
(l.e., kinds of eognitive processes), however, is virtually impossible when only
a topical orientation is given.
In fue instructional activities component, dues were provided by com-
ments made by the teaehers (partieularIy the way aetivities were introdueed to
the students or their deseriptions of fue activities), fue questions teachers asked
of students (and students of teachers), and the assignments students were
gtven as part of or as a follow-up to fue activity. In fue Addition Facts vignette
(Chapter 10), for example, fue teaeher te\ls her students fuat "if they learn one
of fue facts m a famil! (e.g., 3 + 5 = 8), they'lI know fue ofuer (e.g., 5 + 3 = 8).
Therefore, fact fanuhes make the job of memorizing easier because they have
to remember only half of fue facts." From the first statement we learn fuat fue
teacher is using eategories (i.e., faet famllies) to reduce the amounl of memo-
rization that students need to do. Knowledge of fue categories Ihemselves is
Conceptual knowledge. Unlike the Nutrition example, however, the eategories
are not mlended to aid in understanding. Thus, Ihe goal is not understanding
conceptual knowledge. Rafuer, as the teacher makes elear in fue seeond sentenee
the categories are intended lo reduce sludents' "memory load." The verb her~
IS qUIte dearly "remember." The ultimate goal of tms activity, fuen, is for stu-
dents to memorize fue addition faets (i.e., remember factual knowledge). As we
read through the remainder of the vignette, our attention turned to the inter-
esting relationship the teacher establishes between COllceptual knowledge and
Factual knowledge, and between Understand and Remember.
. In the Macbeth vignette (Chapter 9), dues carne from fue questions the
teaeher asks her students. As she leads the diseussion of Act II for example she
k "Wh ' ,
as s, y does Maebeth refuse to return to Dunean's room in order to plant
the bloody dagger on the guards?" To answer tms question, students must
seareh for fue underlying motive for a specific action (or, more specifically, in-
~etion). That is, they must construct a mental model Ihat explains the inaetion
m term~ of one or .more causes. Therefore, we would dassify this question as
explammg, whleh IS assoeiated wifu process category Understand.
Finally, in fue assessment eomponent, our dues carne from fue assessment
tasks as well as fue evaluation criteria (e.g., rating scales, seoring rubries) used
to Judge fue adequaey of student performanees on fue tasks. In fue Parliamen-
tary Aets vignette (Chapter 11), fue teacher provides students wifu an "Evalua-
tion Form" to use in evaluating fueir editorials, editorials that were to be writ-
ten from the perspeetive of a historical figure. The form eontains a set of
evaluatio~ criteria (e:g., Ihe student has at least three reasons to support fue
eharaeter s pomt of Vlew, at least one of wmch is not from the textbook or class
discussion; fue reasons are appropriate to the eharacter and historicaUy aeeu-
rate). In eombination, the eriteria suggest a eoneern for both Factual knowledge
(e.g., historical aeeuracy, reasons taken from the textbook or discussion) and
Conceptual knowledge (e.g., appropriate to fue eharaeter, at least one reason NOT
taken from fue textbook or discussion). When fuese criteria are examined within
the context of fue vignette as a whole, we would argue that students were ex-
pected to remem.ber factual knowledge and understand conceptual knowledge.
Chapler 7 Introduction lo Ihe Vígneltes 117
Finally, in the Addition Faets vignette (Chapter 10), the ultimate assess-
ment is a timed test of addition faets. The "timed" aspect of fue assessment pro-
vided anofuer due fuat fue teachers' coneem is indeed memorization. 5tudents
who attempted to use the various memorization strategies induded in the unít
activities would be unable to complete the assessment in fue time aJlotted.
Thus, fue primary unit objective is to reeall fue addition faets (i.e., remember fac-
tual knowledge), and aU the activities are simply different ways of helping stu-
dents attain fuat objective.
THE ANALYTIC PROCESS: A SUMMARY
After a great deal of diseussion and mueh tria), error, and revision, we arrived
at a four-step process for analyzing fue vignettes. The first step was to identify
and highlight fue elements in the vignettes that lent themselves to analysis in
terms of fue Taxonomy Table. The entries in Table 7.2 proved useful in this re-
gard. The seeond step required fuat we foeus on the relevant nouns and verbs.
Referring frequently to Table 4.1 (for the nouns) and Table 5.1 (for the verbs),
we jotted doWn our "best guesses" about fue type of knowledge and cognitive
pracess underIying the objectives, instruetional activities, and assessments
described by fue teaeher. When possible and useful, we made a tentative
placement of our "best guesses" in fue Taxonomy Table at this poin!. In aetual-
ily, we eompleted Ihree separate Taxonomy Tables: one for our analysis of
fue statement of objeetives, one for our analysis of fue instruetiónal aetivities,
and one for our analysis of fue assessments. In fue fuird step we re-read our en-
tire set of notes and relevant portions of the vignette descriptions to see if we
could make better guesses. In almost all cases we found this re-reading and
re-examination very useful. We revised our notes and the Taxonomy Tables
accordingly. FinaUy, we examined fue consisteney-across fue three tables, eom-
paring fue classifieations of objectives, instructional activities, and assessments
to determine whether fuey were in alignment. Having completed fue analysis,
we translated our notes into narrative form as they are eontained in fue
vignette ehapters.
It was during fuis final step fuat we began to come to grips with sorne of
fue major issues and coneerns fuat confronted fue teaehers as fuey planned and
implemented their uníts. Thesé are discussed in Chapter 14. Not surprisingly,
fue issues and eoncerns we identified have troubled teaehers for sorne time. We
believe that serious consideration of fuese key issues and coneerns along with
serious and sustained attempts to deal with them holds great potential for fue
improvement of edueational quality.
ORGANI:Z:ATION AND STRUCTURE OF THE VIGNETTE CHAPTERS
As we mentioned earlier, we use a eornmon format for Ihe vignettes to allow
fue reader to not only make sense of eaeh vignette but also make eomparisons
aeross fue vignettes.
118 Section m The Taxonorny in Use
The deseriptive portions 01 ea eh vignette, as prepared by the teaehers them-
selves, are printed in the same lonl and size 01 type as th is sentenee and inset
lrom the left margin as is this paragraph.
Periodically, you will encounter a commentary based on our analysis. AH
such cornmentaries are set off with headings printed in the same style of type
as fue rest of this book.
FoHowing each major component (that is, objectives, instructional activi-
ties, and assessments), we summarize our analysis in terms of the Taxonomy
Table. As we mentioned eadier, the end result is three completed Taxonomy
Tables for each vignette. The fust summarizes our analysis based on the objec-
tives. The objectives are indicated in bold type. The second summarizes our
analysis based on fue instructional activities. The actiuities are given in italics.
For ease of comparison, fue objectives are carried over in bold type to this sec-
ond table. The third table surnmarizes our analysis based on the assessments.
The analysis based on the assessments is shown in regular type. Again, fue ob-
jectives (bold) and the instructional activities (italics) are carried overo
We conclude Our discussion of each vignette by examining it in terms 01
fue four guiding questions: the learning question, the instruction question, the
assessment question, and fue alignment question. We also raise a few "closing
questions" about the unit as designed and implemented by the teacher. The
questions can be used as "starting points" for an open discussion of fue unit as
described in fue vignette.
To get the reader started, we describe our analytic process in more detail in
fue first vignette (Chapter 8, Nutrition). The clues we use are shown in bold
type. Specific relationships between these clues and our interpretation of fuem
in terms of types of knowledge and/or specific cognitive processes are made
explicit. In addition, connections between specific cognitive processes (e.g.,
classify) and process categories (e.g., Understand) are highlighted. Finally, we
describe the reasoning behind our classifications when we believe such a de-
scription is necessary and appropriate.
In Chapter 5 we use the standard verb form to refer to process categories
and gerunds to refer to specific cognitive processes. In fue vignettes we deviate
from fuis distinction from time to time only in order to adhere to basic rules of
grammar. However, we conlinue lo capitalize the first letter of each of fue six
process categories to differentiate them Irom lhe 19 specific cognilive proc-
esses, which are nol capilalized. Bofu are ilalicized.
A CLOSING COMMENT
We close lhis chapler by reminding fue reader of our purpose for including fue
vlgnettes. Although we hope they will enhance fue credibility of OUf frame-
work and approach, lheir primary purpose is lo increase readers' undersland-
ing and thus to provide a means lo analyze and ultimately improve the qualily
01 education students receive.
CHAPTER 8
Nutrition Vignette
This vignette describes a two-week unit on commercials developed and taught
by Ms. Nancy C. Nagengast. It is part of a larger nine-week unit on nutrition.
Most recently, 1 taught this unit to a second-grade class eonsisting 01 13 hoys
and 13 girls. In general, the students were very distraetible, but whenever they
got "into" something, whelher it had lo do with sehool or nol, Ihey were moti-
vated and enthusiastic. This unit, taught loward the end of the sehool year,
eapitalized on the study skills and eooperative learning dispositions the stu-
dents had acquired during their year's experienee.
Í"he plan called for 30 minutes a day to be spent on the unit. On sorne days,
when the ehildren became engrossed in an activity, 1 extended the time allot-
ted lor this unit. On other days, when the assignment lor the day had been
eompleted alter 30 minutes or so, we turned Dur attention away lrom commer-
eials and nutrition until lhe next day.
PART 1: OBJECTIVES
Four objeetives were established for the unil. Students were expected to:
1. acquire knowledge 01 a c1assifieation seheme of "appeals'" that describes
the common targels that eommereial writers take into aeeount in wriling
commercials;
2. cheek the inlluenees IhaLeommereials have on their own "senses" and un-
derstand how lhose influenees work on them;
3. evaluale commercials seen on TV or read in newspapers/magazines from
!he standpoint of a set of principies pertaining lo "appeals"; and
4. ereate a commereial abou! a eommon lood product !ha! rellects unde.stand-
ings of how eommercials are designed to intluence polential dients.
1 Attention is directed to dues used in the anal ysis of the appropriate Taxonomy classification by
setting them in bold type.lntended to help readers get started on the analysis process, this oonven-
tion appears in only this, the first of the vignettes.
119
120 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
COMMENTARY
We begin our analysis of this vignette by looking for clues in the statements of
objectives. In the first objective, the primary clue is the phrase "classification
scheme of appeals." In terms oi the knowledge dimension, knowledge oi clas-
sification schemes is Conceptual knowledge. The verb phrase "acquire knowl-
edge" is ambiguous in relation to the cognitive processes. It might refer to Re-
member, Understand, or one of the other process categories. At this poinl, we
withhold judgment and seek additional information.
In the second objective, the primary clues come from the verbs: "check" and
"understand." In Table 5.1 checking is one of the cognitive processes in the cate-
gory Eva/uate. On the surface, "understand" corresponds to the process category
Understand. We are not sure at this point whether the teacher is using the term
in the same way it is used in the Taxonomy Table, but our initial assumption is
that she is. In terms of the knowledge dimension, the focus seems to be on the
students' knowledge of themselves (Le., the way in which students are influ-
enced by commercials). This emphasis on self suggests Metacognitive knowledge.
In the third objective, the students are expected to evaluate the appeals made
in commercials "from the standpoint of a set of principies." In the language of fhe
Taxonorny Table, knowledge of principies is Conceptual knowledge (see Table 4.1).
In terms oi the objective, fhe principies become evaluation eriteria. It is important
to note lhat fhe "noun" in fhis objective is fhe principies, not the commercials; the
commercials are rnerely the rnaterials used to teach the objective. (The reader is
encouraged to re-read our discussion of this important difference on pages 17-18.)
In the iourth objective, the emphasis is on creating eommercials based on
students' "understandings oi how commercials are designed to influence po-
tenlial dien!s." The verb is "create." As in the third objeetive, the noun is not
the commercials; rather, it is "understandings of how commercials are de-
signed," For the time being, we classify this as Procedural knowledge.
Now we ean resta te the iour objectives in terms oi the classifications of the
Taxonomy Table. Students should learn to:
1. remember and understand conceptual knowledge (Le., the classification scheme
of appeals);
2. evaluate and understand metacognitive knowledge (i.e., how students are in-
fluenced by comrnercials);
3. evaluate [based on] conceptual knowledge (i.e., "appeals" principies); and
4. create [based on] procedural knowledge (i.e., knowledge of how eommercials
are designed).
We then place these objectives in the corresponding eells of the Taxonomy
Table as shown in Table 8.1. Because two verbs are included in fhe first two ob-
jectives, Objectives 1 and 2 are placed in two eells of fhe table.
PART 2: INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
After reviewing what we discussed about the four food groups and nutritious
foad earlier in the larger unit (see, for example, Attachment A at the end of
8.1 ANALYSIS OF THE NUTRITION VIGNETTE IN TERMS OF THE
TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON STATED OBJECTIVES
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE t. DIMENSION REMEMBER A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
2. UNDER$TAND 3. ApPLY 4. ANALYZE S.
EVALUATE
6.
CREATE
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 1 Objective 1 Objective 3
c.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 4
D.
META-
eOGNITIVE
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 2 Objective 2
~~ective 1 = Acquire knowledge of a classification scheme of "appeals."
Objective 2 = Check the influences corrunercials have ?n students' "s~s~s."
Objective 3 = Eva1uate cornmercials from the standpomt o~ a set of pnnClples. . . .
Objective 4 = Create a com.mercial that reflects understandmgs of how conunem.als are deslpned to influence people.
122 Section lIT The Taxonomy in Use
the chapter), I mentioned loods seen on lelevision. I suggested that sorne
commercials aim at the idea 01 economy (i.e., trying to convince people that
buying lhe product will save money), while others locus on ease (e.g., lrying
to convince people thal buying the product will save time and ellort over al-
ternatives). I lhen summarized by stating that these were examples of appeals
that commercials make lo the television viewer/potential consumer.
COMMENTARY
Once again we look for dues in fue leacher' s description of her instruction ac-
tivities (see bold type). The teacher is presenting a variety of Factual knowledge
related to fue fust objective. In addition, fue exercises in Atlaclunent A focus on
Factual knowledge (e.g., locate and circle fue fat grams, locate and cirde the calo-
ries). The activity eifuer (1) is preparatory to fue first objective or (2) suggests
fuat Factual knowledge is an important component of fue first objective. We opt
for fue fust choice because fue teacher immediately begins to discuss each spe-
cific food in terms of one (or more) category of appeals.
Six such appeals were presented. In addition to ease and economy, the others
were health, fear, love/admiration, and comfortjpleasure. Over the nexl lew
days, students spenl lime with examples and nonexamples 01 each appeal and
gave examples to illustrale their understanding.
COMMENTARY
At this point fue teacher completes fue shift to Conceptual knowledge. The due to
fuis shift is fue use of examples and nonexamples (a recognized approach to
teaching Conceptual knowledge). Apparently Ms. Nagengast intends her students
to acquire a dassification system !hat indudes six types of appeals. These activi-
ties, in addition to her use of fue word "understanding," darify fue meaning of
the fust objective. The emphasis is on understanding conceptual knowledge.
lo assess how well students had acquired the concepts in lhis scheme, I asked
them to describe a commercial and lhen to atlribute to the commercial writers
the appeal they were making to the audience. Alternatively, I gave students an
appeal as a prompt and asked them to develop a claim lor a given product
that would match that appeal.
COMMENTARY
These tasks also contribute to our understanding of fue first objective. The first
task is a form of classifying (placing specific cornmercials into the proper ap-
peals category). The alternative task is a form of exemplifying (giving an exam-
pie of a cornmercial for a specific type of appeal). Although bofu of these cog-
nitive processes fall into the same category Understand (see inside fue back
cover), fuey are not identical.
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapler 8 Nutrition Vignette 123
One phrase used by the teacher requires additional consideration: "at-
tribute to the cornmercial writers." This phrase suggests that students are not
to classify the commercials based on fue appeal-effect fue commercial has on
them; rather, fuey are to classify commercials on fue basis of fue appeal in-
tended by fue developer of the commercial. As we show in Table 5.1, atlribut-
ing is a cognitive process associated wifu fue category Analyze, which is a more
complex category fuan Understand.
Sorne sludenls were imaginative and Iluent in matching commercials with
appeals. Others had difficulty, and olten the appeal lhey identilied as the
targel 01 the ad writer was, at least Irom my point 01 view, decidedly off target.
ls there an explanation for this "learning problem"? Ms. Nagengast is dis-
cussing the instructional activities related to the first objective. But students
may have fue second objective in fueir minds as well, which would make fuem
aware of fue effect of fue appeals on themselves. Consistent with her first ob-
jective, Ms. Nagengast is asking about fue intended appeal of the writer. The
students, however, realizing that the unit is also about the second objective,
may miss this distinction. Therefore, those operating from an analytic (attribu-
tional) framework will more likely produce "proper" classifications. In con-
trast, students who respond in terms of fueir own understanding (its effect on
fuem) can be expected to produce fewer corree! dassifications.
From these exercises, I was able to determine which sludents had and had nol
mastered the concepl 01 appeal as it applied to nutritional commercials. lo be
successlul, students not only had to recall the names of all six appeals bul also
had to understand the concept of appeals well enough to classify commercials
appropriately.
Ms. Nagengast is making an important distinction here. Students may be able
to remember the name oí fue dass to which the appeal was assigned (Factual
knowledge), but fuey may not be able to dassify examples of appeals correctly
(Conceptual knowledge). Ms. Nagengast is concerned with bofu types of knowl-
edge. Thus, fue activities related to Objective 1 focus on bofu Remember and Un-
derstand and on bofu Factual and Conceptual knowledge (see Table 8.2).
My second objective was lar students to examine the impacl that commercials
have on their own decisions. Students were asked to respond to the impact
that various "hooks" had on their own thinking. A lirsl step was lo gel sludents
to examine lhe phrases they associated wilh various products (see Attachment
B) and lhen to rellect on the impacl lhose commercials had on lheir feelings.
8.2 ANALYSIS OF THE NUTRITION VIGNETTE IN TERMS OF THE
TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
THE COGNITIVE PROCE55 DIMEN5ION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMEN5ION 1. REMEMBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3.
ApPLY
4. ANALYZE 5.
EVALUATE
6.
CREATE
A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE Activities
during
teaching of
Objective 1
B.
CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE
Objective 1 Objective 1
Activities
during
teaching of
Objective 1
Activities during teaching of Objective 1 Objective 3
Activities
Activities
during
during teaching of
teaching of
Objective 4
Objective 3
c.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE Activities
during teaching of
Objective 4
Objective 4
D.
META~ COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDGE Objective 2
Activities
during
teaching of
Objective 2
Activities during teaching of
Objective 2
Objective 2
Key
Objective 1 = Acquire knowledge of a classification scheme of "appeals."
Objective 2 = Check the influences cornmercials have on students' "senses."
Objective 3 = Evaluate cornmercials from the standpoint of a set of principIes.
Objective 4 = Create a cornmercial that reflects understandings of how cornmercials are designed to influence people.
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapler 8 Nutrilion Vignette 125
Consislenl wifu Ihe slaled inlenl of Objective 2, Ihese activities focus on Ihe
impac! of Ihe commercials on Ihe sludenls fuemselves. The initial "matching
exercise" (Attachmenl B) is an attempl to determine fue studenls' Factual
knowledge aboul commercials. The questions asked by fue leacher appear lo be
intended to stimulate Metacognitive knowledge.
In class discussion, studenís were asked questions such as "What did you
Ihink when you heard this commercial?" and "What was the commercial
wriler expecting you lo Ihink when the ad said that Michael Jordan uses the
product?" The comments, questions, and observations shared in this discus-
sion served as the evidence bearing on my seeond objective.
The firs! question reinforees our belief that Objective 2 emphasizes understand-
ing metacognitive knowledge (Le., to understand the impact Ihat eommercials
have on the students). The seeond question asks for more fuan Understanding.
Students are expected to examine fue commercial from the poinl of view of
!he writer/designer of Ihe commercial (Le., attribute). This queslion reinforces
our belief tha! fue teacher wanls s!uden!s lo Analyze commereials by making
attribulions aboul Ihe motives of Iheir writers/designers. This also is consis-
tent wifu our commentary on fue activi!ies relaled to fue firsl objective.
Once the students had mastered the idea 01 the appeals and discussed the
eflecís 01 those appeals on themselves, I played three or lour commercials
on the VCR, asking students, working in groups, to evaluate how well the
commercials "worked." Specilically, studenís were to judge how well Ihe
commercial made Ihe appeal and how convincing and compelling it was.
Sludents generaled crileria for "being convincing" through a teacher-pupil
planning session. The criteria were incorporated into an initial draft 01 a scor-
ing guide. After a lew revisions, the scoring guide became more uselul to the
studenís in registering their evaluations 01 the commercial (see Attachment C
at the end 01 the chapter). One 01 the major diflerences in the drafts was that
the early versions 01 the scoring guide rellected too much 01 my own language
and not enough 01 that 01 the studenís.
Here Ihe focus shifls to Evaluate. In order lo Evaluate, students mus! possess
knowledge of Ihe criteria that fuey generaled to define "being eonvincing"
(Conceptual knowledge). Again, we must emphasize fuat fue commercials fuem-
selves are simply Ihe materials used lo teach fue knowledge; Ihey are no! fue
knowledge lo be leamed per se. Ms. Nagengast clearly intends fue students to
126 Section nI The Taxonorny in Use
use their knowledge with commercials encountered outside of dass and in the
future.
The culminating activity in this unit had students, in groups 01 two to lour,
working to create their own commercials. Each group was to select a lood
product and to prepare a tentative advertising plan for the produc!. These
plans would then be shared with another group in the class and feedback
would be provided using the scoring rubric developed for evaluating com-
mercials, along with the nutrition concepts lrom earlier lessons in the larger
unit.
COMMENTARY
In Table 5.1 planning is a cognitive process in the category Create. Because the
students are to plan their cornmercials based on their knowledge of how to de-
sign commercials to influence potential dienls, the knowledge component of
the objective would fall inlo the Procedural knowledge category. Because the
plans are to be evaluated on the basis of explicit criteria, Conceptual knowledge is
also involved. Nonetheless, we would dassify this objective as Crea te [based
on] Procedural knowledge.
Alter receiving feedback about their planning from their peers and from me,
the students rehearsed their commercials and then presented them to the
whole class. Subsequently, the groups presented their commercials to a larger
audience including parents, teachers, and other second-grade classes. Each
effort was videotaped so that I could analyze it carefully at my leisure rather
than "on the fly" while it was being presented.
Once all the commercials were performed, I convened the groups again
and asked them to summarize what things they had done as a group that had
been particularly useful in producing the commercials and what things the
group might have done lo do a betler jobo Students were reminded nol to
blame individuals within their group but instead to locus on those elements 01
the group process that might be uselul to remember the next time they worked
in groups. Each group reported the products of their thinking to the entire
class, and I recorded the insights generated by the class on a sheet 01 poster
papero
COMMENTARY
We assume that the scoring guide in Attachment C provides the criteria used
to Evaluate the final commercials. Note that Ms. Nagengast avoids the word
Evaluate, choosing Analyze instead. Clearly, the scoring guide requires analysis;
however, the analysis performed provides the basis for evaluating the quality
of the commercials. In addition to the criteria induded in Attachment e,
studenls are asked to evaluate the group process according to three criteria:
Chapter 8 Nutrition Vignette 127
(1) areas of strength, (2) ways of improving the process, and (3) avoidance of
the placement oI blame. Because these are "non-cognitive" criteria, we do not
dassify them in the Taxonomy Table.
Throughout this final segment 01 the nutrition unit, the purpose of each
aclivity became more elear to the sludents. Students became enthralled in
singing and/or reciting commercials verbatim and consequently completing
the workshee!.
COMMENTARY
The students themselves are learning the diflerence between the aclivities and
the objective (Le., the purpose of the activity in lerms of the intended learning
outcome).
Our analysis of the entire set of inslructional activities over the ten-day pe-
riod was surnmarized in Table 8.2 shown earlier. To aid in comparing the activ-
ities with the stated objectives, the objectives from Table 8.1 were reproduced
in bold type in Table 8.2. The inslructional activilies were italicized.
PART 3: ASSESSMENT
I assessed the students in various ways. Class discussions provided uselul
inlormation as to whether the students were grasping the objectives. As the
students began working in groups, I would walk around the room monitoring
their progress and checking to make sure each person in the group was con-
tributing to the projec!. These unobtrusive observations provided me a true
indicator 01 their progress.
In addition to monitoring the discussion in which students were engaged,
I read the worksheets the students generated as part 01 their study (e.g., their
plans lor their commercials). Ultimately, I did a rigorous evaluation ofthe
commercials the students prepared lor signs 01 understanding 01 the principal
ideas associated wilh nulrilion.
I graded them lor completion 01 class work and homework. Throughout
the unit, I kept a record 01 each student's effort in this regard with the distinc-
tions 01 a check-plus, check, or check-minus entered into the grade book.
Finally, the students engaged in an oral evaluation 01 both their linal com-
mereials and their work as cooperative groups. Alter they had completed the
unit, students occasionally commented on the commercials !hey saw on televi-
sion and olten wrote about the unit as one 01 the lavorite activities done that year.
COMMENTARY
The vast majorily of Ms. Nagengast's discussion of assessmenl pertains lo in-
formal assessmenl and grading. She developed separale assessmenl lasks for
only the firsl objeclive. For all other objectives she used selecled inslructiona.1
activities as assessmenl lasks; thal is, Ihe activities were inlended lo help
128 Section lIT The Taxonorny in Use
students learn and to allow Ms. Nagengast to assess students' learning. This
dual function of instructional activities (for facilitating both learning and as-
sessment) is fairly common for the teachers who prepared the vignettes. In
most instances, although it may contribute to student grades, the assessment is
considered formative because its primary purpose is to put students "on the
right track."
The one aspect of assessment that lends itself to analysis in terms of the
Taxonomy Table is Ms. Nagengast's "rigorous evaluation of the commercials"
prepared by the students. The scoring guide used to evaluate the commercials
contains six criteria ("scoring elements") (see Attachment C). The fust scoring
element (A) pertains to the general appropriateness of the commercial to the
unit (Le., nutrition) and so was not classified. The second scoring element (B) is
tangentially related to Objective 1. Rather than identify the type of appeal (i.e.,
Conceptual knowledge), the emphasis is on whether the commercial appealed to
"wants and needs" (a more affective than cognitive concern). The third scoring
element (C) is the one related most directly to the knowledge contained in Ob-
jective 4 (Le., Procedural knowledge). The scoring element criterion (D) pertains
to realism (and therefore is tangentially to the objectives as stated). However,
we place this in cell B6 (create [based on] conceptual knowledge). Both the fifth (É)
and sixth (F) criteria address the audience of the commercial. Did the commer-
cial make the audience want to buy the food? Was the commercial aimed at the
intended audience? These criteria are related to Objective 2, if one assumes the
students see themselves as the intended audience.
Our analysis of the assessments in terms of the Taxonomy Table is pre-
sented in Table 8.3. Again, for comparison purposes, the entries from Tables 8.1
(objectives) and Table 8.2 (instructional activities) are reproduced in Table 8.3.
PART 4: CLOSING COMMENTARY
In this section we examine the vignette in terms of our four basic questions: the
learning question, the instruction question, the assessment quesHon, and the
alignmentquestion.
THE LEARNING QUESTION
The overall purpose of the unit is for students to learn to create commercials
about common food products that reflect their understanding of how commer-
cials are designed to influence potential consumers (Objective 4). As mentioned
in our summary of the instrucHonal activities, the unit builds from objective to
objective, culminating in Objective 4. In terms of emphasis, fully five of the ten
days spent on the unit are devoted to the fourth objective. In addition, the
fourth objective is the only one subjected to formal assessment and evaluation.
THE INSTRUCTION QUESTION
It is interesting that the order of the instructional activities corresponds to the
sequence of the stated objectives. That is, the activities are used to move
8.3 ANALYSIS OF THE NUTRITION VIGNETTE IN TERMS OF THE
TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON ASSESSMENTS
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE
DIMENSION
A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
L
REMEMBER
Activities
during
teaching of
Objective 1
2.
UNDERSTAND
3.
ApPLY
4.
ANALYZE
S.
EVALUATE
6.
CREATE
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 1
Activities
during teaching of
Objective 1
Activities
during teaching of
Objective4
Assess 4;
Element C. D
C.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
Activities
during teaching of Objective 4
Objective 4
D.
META-
COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 2
Activities
during teachingof
Objective2
Actívities during teaching of
Objecti'le 2
Assess 2
Objective 2
Assess 4
Elements E. F
Key len 1 d f 1 if' . sch f" 1 "
Objective 1 = Acquire ,ow e ge o a e ass ~cation eme o aF!~;a s. "
Objective 2 = Check the mfluences cornmerCla1s have ?n students ~:s.
Objective 3 = Evaluate commerdals from the standpomt of a set of prmclples. . . .
Objective 4 = Create a commercial that reflects underst~n~ings of how commerClals are deslgned to influence peopIe.
Assess 1 = Classroom exercise----classifying and exemplifying.
Assess 2 = "Higher-order" c1assroom questions.
Assess 3 = Commercials on videotapes.
Assess 4 = Scoring guide. .
Dark shading indicates fue strongest alignment-an objective, an instnlctional activity, and an assessment are all present m fue same
cell. Lighter shading indicates two of fue three are presento
130 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
students from remembering and understanding conceptual knowledge (Objective 1)
lo understanding and analyzing metacognitive knowledge (Objective 2) to evaluat-
ing commercials based on conceptual knowledge (Objective 3) lo creating com-
mercials based on procedural knowledge (Objective 4).
Generally speaking, Ihe activilies in which Ms. Nagengasl engaged her
studenls are consistenl wilh her learning inlenlions. She used positive and neg-
alive examples lo teach Iypes (calegories) of appeals (Conceptual knowledge).
She gave studenls praclice in e1assifying and exemplifying (Understand). She
used so-called higher-order questions in her pursuil of Metacognitive knowledge
(e.g., "Whal do you think?"). She worked wilh Ihe students lO develop Ihe cri-
leria (Conceptual knowledge) used to evaluate Ihe commercials, and sludents
practiced using Ihe criteria in Evaluating. Finally, wilh resped lo Creating com-
mercials, she asked students to prepare plans, provide and receive feedback on
Ihe plans, rehearse Ihe plans "in action," and ullimately implemenl Ihe plans
in front of several audiences.
THE ASSESSMENT qUESTION
The teacher used bolh informal and formal assessments. As shown in Table 8.3,
she used Ihe informal assessrnents lo determine students' progress on Ihe firsl
three objectives. Thus, Ihese assessrnents were formative in natute. The scoring
guide used in Ihe informal assessment relative to Objective 3 was developed in
part by Ihe sludents. Once developed, it formed Ihe basis for Ihe more formal
assessment oí Objecti ve 4.
There was bolh a formative and summalive assessmenl oí Ihe fourlh objec-
tive. Bolh assessments relied on lhe aforementioned scoring guide. The forma-
tive assesomenl was a peer assessmenl of Ihe plans for Ihe commercials. The
summative assessment was a leacher assessmenl of lhe production of Ihe
commercial.
THE ALIGNMENT qUESTION
Overall, Ihe alignmenl among objectives, inslructional activities, and assess-
menls is quile slrong. This alignmenl is mosl evidenl for Objectives 1 and 3
(see Table 8.3). If we look at Ihe cells of Ihe lable, Ihe aJignment is less e1ear for
lhe olher objective. By focusing on lhe rows of Ihe table, however, we see a
reasonable degree of alignment for lhe second objective. The emphasis on
Metacognitive knowledge is e1ear in Objective 2 and in the relaled instructional
activilies and assessmenls. The misalignmenl slems írom a slight difference in
Ihe process calegories Analyze and Evaluate. A similar poinl can be made for Ihe
fourlh objeclive. This time, however, the misalignmenl comes from the
columns of Table 8.3. The staled objective, instructional activities, and assess-
ments all focus on Crea te. The differences pertain lo Ihe types of knowledge
tapped by lhe formal assessment. In addition lo Procedural knowledge, the scor-
ing guide ineludes criteria relating to Conceptual knowledge and Metacognitive
knowledge.
Chapter 8 Nutrition Vignette 131
Most of Ihe anomalies in Table 8.3 may be explained fairly easily. For
example, Objective 1 is placed in two cells: remember conceptual knowledge and
understand conceptual knowledge. After reviewing the entire uníl, we believe our
initial c1assification oí lhe staled objective as remember conceptual knowledge is
inaccurale. Similarly, although SOrne of Ihe inslructional activilies relaled to
Objective 1 are placed in lhe cell corresponding lo remember factual knowledge,
these activities involve associating Ihe names of lhe appeals (Factual knowledge)
wilh lhe categories oí appeals (Conceptual knowledge). This activity is important,
bul il may nol justify an objeclive in and of ilself (or a formal assessmenl). Fi-
nally, sorne activities related lo Objective 1 are placed in lhe cell corresponding
lo analyze conceptual knowledge ralher lhan understand conceptual knowledge. The
difference belween attribute and c1assify is subslantial and worlhy of discussion
(see below). In relrospect, lhen, we would eliminale lhe enlries in cells Al (re-
member factual knowledge) and B1 (remember conceptual knowledge), bul keep the
entry in cell B4 (analyze conceptual knowledge).
PART S: CLOSING QUESTIONS
As wilh lhe analysis of aII our vignetles, we were left wilh a few unanswered
questions. We raise tbree of Ihe most interesting in this elosing section.
1. Is it sufficienl lo alígn objectíves, ínstruclíonal actívities, and assess-
menls ín lerms of !he rows or columns alone? This question comes from
our examination of Table 8.3 (see aboye) coupled wilh our analysis of Ihe
activilies relaled to Ihe fust objective. It seems elear to us lhat Ihe objective
and activities focus on Conceptual knowledge. There is, however, a differ-
ence belween Understand (exemplifying and c1assifying) and Analyze (at-
tributing), which is implicit in lhe objective and is made explicit in Ihe
leacher's reaction to studenl performance of lhe assessment tasks. As we
mentioned on our commentary on lhe activities relaled lo Objective 1,
studentS who classify based on lheir own reactions to a commercial (Un-
derstand) are likely lo arrive al appeals !hal are differenl from lhose of slu-
dents who c1assify based on appeals Ihey attribule lo lhe wrilers/design-
ers of lhe commercials (Analyze). This question is importanl beca use, in
common practice, alignmetl:l decisions are often based solely on lhe
knowledge dimension or Ihe cognilive process dimensiono Alignment de-
cisions based on eilher dimension alone may be misleading in terrns of Ihe
inleraction between Ihe two dimensions thal, we believe, define intended
sludenl leaming.
2. Is ít possíble Ihat sludent input ¡nto developing scoring rubrico pro-
duced rubrics wílh less lhan optímum validity? On lhe one hand, it is
difficull lo criticize teachers who involve studenls in setting criteria íor
evaluating lheir own work. On Ihe olher, a problem may result if too
much reHance is placed on studenl input. Of Ihe six critería developed by
lhe studenls, only lwo (A and E) or tbree (e) relale elearly to lhe knowl-
edge inlended to be developed in lhe instructional unit. The olher crilería
132 Section ID The Taxonomy in Use
ATTACHMENT A READ THE LABEL
are a bit vague (B), or tangentially related (D and F) to nutrition, the con-
ten! of Ihe unit. As a consequence, students who master Ihe Conceptual
knowledge (e.g., Ihe classification of appeals) and Procedural knowledge (e.g.,
Ihe "technical" aspects of designing "appealing" commercials) may stiU
receive low overaU evaluations based on the less than optimally valid cri-
teria used to evaluate the prepared cornmercials. One way of preempting
this problem may be !o establish a set of meta-criteria, Ihat is, a set of crite-
ria to be used jointly wilh Ihe students in determining Ihe criteria to in-
elude on Ihe scoring rubrico Alternatively, Ihe teacher may critique Ihe cri-
teria along wilh Ihe studen!s, leading Ihem to recognize any problems
wilh Ihe criteria (e.g., irrelevancy).
3. What are the advantages and disadvantages of having instructional ac-
tivities serve both a learning and an assessrnent function? The praclice
of using ins!nictional activities for bolh learning and assessment pur-
poses, Ihough fairly cornmon, causes at least two problems. The first is
blurring Ihe distinction between objectives and instructional activities;
Ihat is, students who perform well on a single activity (i.e., Ihe production
of a single cornmercial) are assumed to have mastered Ihe objective (Le.,
Ihe ability to produce cornmercials Ihal mee! specified criteria) when Ihe
activity is but a single example of Ihe realm of aclivities circumscribed by
Ihe objective.
The second problem comes in delineating where teaching ends and
assessment begins. TraditionaUy, teachers help students wilh instructional
activities, whereas students are "left alone" when performing assessment
tasks. Assessment tasks, Ihen, provide an "independent estimate" of learn-
ing (lhat is, independent of teacher assistance and involvement). When
instructional activities serve bolh learning and assessment functions, this
independence is lost. The result is !hat an assessment is made of bolh
teaching and learning for Ihat individual, not of learning alone. It may
be difficu1t, even impossible, for teachers lo separate Ihese functions in
Iheir own minds.
The primary advantage of using instructional activities for bolh
purposes is a general increase in Ihe authenticity of Ihe assessment and,
hence,its instructional validity. The issue to be addressed is whelher this
trade-off is reasonable. Probably teachers are less focused on keeping in-
struction and assessments independent Ihan are supervisors and adminis-
trators, who are concerned about Ihe impact on Iheir schools jf students
do poorly. Where punishment of low-scoring schools is a real concern,
then perhaps Ihe trade-off balance involved in combining instruction and
assessment needs to be adjusted.
Read the
Label!
Read Ihese food la beIs lo find
oul !he nutritional value ot !he
toad shown on Ihis page.
NUTRITIOUS
2%
NUTRITION INFORMATION
SERVING SllE .... .. .. 1 CUP
CALORIES ............ 120
PROTEIN .... ..... 8 GRAMS
CARBOHYORATE .• 11 GRAMS
FAT .............. 5 GRAMS
SOOIUM .... .. ..... 12S mg
I~~~
'~'r:~~~~~ NUTRiTlON INFORMATION - PER 112 CUP SERVlNG
~ SERVINGS PER CONTAINER ............ APPROX.4
CALORIES .... .. ... 60 fAT ...... .... ...... o 9
PROTEIN ........... o 9 SOOIUM .......... 20 rng
CAR80HYORATE . . CHOLESTEROL . . .. . . . o
"""'
, KERNEL
CORN
Use a red crayon lo cirde Ihe tal found
in each toad. Use a blue crayon lo
cirde !he calories found in eaeh toad.
NUTRITION INFORMATION
SERVlNG SllE .... .. .. 3.3 Ol.
CALORIES ............... 80
PROTEIN ........... 3 GRAMS
CARBOHYDRATE .. . 20 GRAMS
FAT ................. 1 GRAM
.. .... .. ..... S
NU TRITION INFORMAnON
CALORIES .. 250 PROTEIN .. s 9 CAR80HYORATE .. 20
FAT .. 2 9 SOOIUM .. 25 mg
Read !he tood la beis on Ihe
toad you eal al home. Can you
find Ihe nutrition informalion7
133
ATTACHMENT B IDENTIFICATION OF PRODUCTS FROM
THEIR "HOOKS"
ATTACHMENT e SCORING GUIDE
Performance Tasi<: Working as a team lrom an advertising agency, study a load product that you eat every day in terms 01 its nutri-
tional values. Plan and present a compelling yet truthlul commercial aimed at your dassmates to induce them to eat more 01 your
producto Promote your product by appealing to their individual needs and wants. Use various techniques to convince your viewers
that your product is worth buying, but make sure your claims are accurate and your techniques realistic.
Can you identify the lollowing products from their hooks?
1. Have you had your break today?
2. Where a kid can be a kid
3. Just do it
4. Pizza Pizza
5. llave what you do lar me
6. Melts in your mouth. not in your hand
Scoring Elemenl
A. Oid the commercial locus
an nutri tion and ¡b.
nut/iUonal value ofload?
B. Oid the eommercial
appeal to individua!'s
wants and needs?
C. Oid the commercial make
use of techniques to convince
viewers?
D. Oid the commertial use
realism in it1; ted1niquesl
E. Oid the commercial make
the audience want to buy
the load?
F. Was the cornmercial aimed
at the intended audience?
Performance Levels
4-Principal focus was on toad and nutrition.
3-Nutrition was only one 01 many ideas in the
commercial-the others were a distradion.
2-Nutrition was mentioned but drowned out by other tapies.
1-Nutrition was ignored in the commercial.
4-Message grabbed kids in dass.
3-Message caused most kids to sit up and notice.
2-Message caught some students' attention.
l-Message was hard to lollow or to engage.
4-Techniques were t~oughtful and distinctive.
3-Techniques were copy-cat 01 commercials on TV.
2-Teehniques were induded but were not really a part 01 the
design; they seemed simply added on.
l-No techniques.
4-Very realistic.lt was like "being there!"
3--<Jne (or twol unrealistic elements, but on the
whole quite real.
2-Many unrealistic elements in the cornmercial.
l-Hard to find what's real.
4-Members 01 the audience would rush out to buy the producto
3-Members will buy the product during the nex! shopping trip.
2-Members might consider buying il.
l-Probably nol.
4-Commercial was right on targel.
3-Some elements of the commercial would have gane over
their heads, but on the whole all righl.
2-A large part 01 the audience was 1051.
l-Almost no one got the message.
134
135
...
CHAPTER 9
Macbeth Vignette
This instruetional unít, developed and taught by Ms. Margaret Jaekson, is in-
tended for "low-level" high school seniors.
I had my lirst experience teaching Shakespeare to these students when I de-
cided to quit torturing myself with what passed for a literature text for these
students. The educational philosophy reflected in the literature text was predi-
cated on the assumption that students, particularly those labeled "education-
ally challenged," could neither comprehend nor appreciate literalure lha! was
not "relevant" to their particular situation.
In contrast, I believe that great literature is everyone's birthright beeause it
does not require that "relevaney" be externally imposed. Rather, a street-wise
teenager from the projeets-whieh these students were-can possess Shake-
speare as completely and comfortably as a college professor.
I initially had so me misgivings about the language-many students were
reading below a fifth-grade level and had difficulty writing coherent sentences.
But lhey had less trouble and complained far less than my college-bound stu-
dents. I realized that these students considered English in any form to be com-
pletely beyond their ken; a modern novel was as unintelligible to them as a
16th-century dramal They also immediately understood Macbeth's eharacter
and motivations; the world they live in has some striking similarities to 11 th-
century Scotland. In both places, if someone gets in the way of an ambitious
person, he or she is likely to get knifed.
I felt under a certain amount of self-imposed pressure lo reduce the
amount of time on lhis uni!. My general experience had been thal if Macbeth
isn't finished by Christmas, I won'l get to the Romantics until just before the
Mayexamination. However, these students put up definite resistanee to being
rushed and I was unable to pare the unit down to less than five weeks. This
schedule allowed for a little under one week per act, leaving time at the end
for review and testing.
136
Chapler 9 Macbelh Vignette 137
PART 1: OB.JECTIVES
The majar objective of this five-week unit. is that students willlearn to see the
relevance of literary works such as Macbeth to their own lives. A secondary
objective is for students to remember important details about the play (e.g.,
speeifie events, characters, and their relationships).
COMMENTARY
In the majar objective, the verb phrase is "see fue relevanee" and the noun
phrase is "literary works in their own lives." In order to "see the relevanee," it
seems likely that sludents will compare characters and events in the play wifu
characters and evenls from their own experience. In Table 5.1 (see inside back
cover) compare is a cognitive process in fue category Understand. Wifu respect to
fue noun phrase, the emphasis is on literary works, wifu Macbeth being one ex-
ample ("such as"). Because "literary works" denotes a category of writings,
knowledge of literary works is Conceptual knowledge). Furthermore, because lit-
erary works contain concepts such as "character," "
plot," and l'setting,1I knowl-
edge of fuese concepts ·is also classified as Conceptítal knowledge. Macbeth is a spe-
cific literary work. Within Macbeth there are specific characters, a specific plot
(and subplots), and specific settings. Knowledge of fuese specifics is Factual
knlJWledge.
Because fue second objective clearly emphasizes fue details of a specific lit-
erary work, we classify it as remember factual knlJWledge. The first objective, on
fue other hand, suggests a more general concern of fue teacher. Consequently,
we classify it as understand conceptual knowledge.
The placement of these two objectives in the cells of the Taxonomy Table is
shown in Table 9.1.
PART 2: INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
Introductory Activity
The first day I focused on what I considered sorne 01 the pl ay's primary con-
cepts. I put the words "ambition," "temptation," and "fear" on the board and
divided the elass into three groups. The individuals in eaeh group were asked
to write lor five minutes on one 01 lhe three words. They very quiekly under-
stood how ambition ean help.or hinder a person, how temptation can be re-
sisted, and how fear can be handled or conquered. This led into a discussion
01 how these three terms are central to an understanding of Macbe/h.
I then told the students that Shakespeare would have been dealing with an
extremely diverse audience whose attention was diffieult to capture and hold;
therefore, he would have found it necessary to hit the ground running, estab-
lishing in the opening scene a mood that would permeate the entire play.
Students were then asked to follow along in their books while I read Aet 1 ,
scene i aloud, paying particular attention to lhe key words that aid in creating
9.1 ANALYSIS OF THE MACBETH VIGNETTE IN TERMS OF THE
TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON STATED OB.JECTIVES
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
lo REMEMBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3. APPLY 4.
ANALY%E
5.
EVALUATE
6.
CREATE
Objective 2
COMMENTARY
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEtlGIE
Objective 1
C.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
D.
META~
COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDGE
Key
Objective 1 = Students will see the relevance of literary works such as Mncbeth to their own lives.
Objective 2 = Students will remember important details about the play.
Chapler 9 Macbeth Vignette
139
the predominant mood. (The seene is only 11 lines long, but almost every
ward is loaded with signilieanee.)
1 drew the students' attenlion lo Ihe line "fair is loul and loul is fair" and
asked Ihem lo put il in their own words. They ended up wilh !he paradoxical
eoneept: "Good is bad and bad is good," whieh led inlo a discussion of how
some!hing good eould be bad and vice versa. Examples induded alcohol,
drugs, and sexo 1 stressed, as 1 eontinued to do throughout the unil, how this
seemingly contradietory statement begins to develop what 1 see as the play's
principal theme: Things are not as they seem.
The emphasis in Ihis introductory activity is on understanding conceptual knowl-
edge. Key concepts include ambition, temptation, fear (in the fust paragraph of
the Introductory Activity Section), mood (in the second paragraph), and para-
dox (in Ihe third paragraph). In addition lo Ihe knowledge clues, students are
asked to "put things in their own words" (lhird paragraph) and come up wilh
contemporary examples (third p"ragraph). In Table 5.1 (see inside back cover),
"paraphrase" is associated wilh interpreting and "generating examples" is ex-
emplifying. Both interpreting and exemplifyi!,g are cognitive pracesses associated
wilh Ihe calegory Understand.
Activities Related to Act 1
1 began by telling students they had to -vrile scene-by-seene synopses. Next,
1 initiated a diseussion 01 the "tragie hero"-a persa n 01 great stature and
distinclion who is destroyed as a result 01 a eharaeter delecl. The students all
had observed lirst hand the "pity and lear" engendered by someone who sows
the seeds 01 his or her own destruction while pursuing a dream. Students
were helped to see the relevanee 01 Macbeth to Iheir own lives in that, given
the right cireumstanees, Ihe same thing could happen lo many 01 them.
Sludenls were assigned parts and Ihe play was read ala ud, stopping after
eaeh scene lar whatever explicalion was necessary. 1 asked questions whieh
lacused primarily on understanding (e.g., "What are Maebeth's strenglhs of
eharacter?" "What would have happened il Maebe!h had never mel the
witches?").
Despite initial reluclanee and sell-conseiousness on the part 01 students,
1 insisted that students "ael out" key seenes, wilh the dass assuming!he role
01 direelar. Initially 1 had to do almosl all the direeting, but once the students
grasped the eoncept 01 there being aetions behind the wards, the efleet was
energizing.
After reading and diseussing Aet 1, students were shown three difieren!
film versions: the 19405 version direeted by and starring Orson Welles; Roman
Polanski's graphie and bloody 1972 treatmenl; and Ihe BBC version Irom
"The Shakespeare Plays" series. Belare 1 showed Aet 1 01 these Ihree versions,
140 Section III The Taxonorny in Use
Chapler 9 Macbeth Vignette 141
students were asked to write for five minutes on what a good movie version
01 Macbeth should include by way 01 cinematography and characterization.
I then distributed a chart (see Attachment A at the end 01 the chapter) to be
used to compare the three lilms. Following the viewing 01 the three versions
01 Act 1, I distributed an oulline lor a comparison/contrast paper on the three
lil m versions (see Attachment B at the end 01 the chapter), with the introduc-
tion to be written the next day in the writing lab and the rough draft due the
nextweek.
The activities relative to Act I took about one week to complete.
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
As in the introductory activity, the focus is on Conceptual knowledge. Key con-
cepts indude tragic hero, character defects, cinematography, and characteriza-
tion. The nature of Ms. Jackson's questions is consistent with Understand (e.g.,
exemplifying and inferring). The chart (Attachment A) contains seven key con-
cepts that are used as the basis for comparing and contrasting three film ver-
sions of the play. The first four concepts (setting, sound, lighting, and special
effects) concem elements of the films; the last three concepts pertain to the
characterization of the witches, Macbeth, and Lady Macbeth. Since comparing
is a cognitive process in the category Understand, the focus of these activities is,
once again, understanding conceptual knowledge.
The emphasis on understanding conceptual knowledge continues. The film journal
requires comparing and contrasting (hence Understanding). Two superordinate
concepts--cinematography and characterization-are used to organize the
journal. In the study of Act II, the major concept is motif. Specifically, students
are to examine three motifs as they read Act TI: blood, sleep, and darkness. The
affective aspect of concepts is acknowledged when Ms. Jackson has the stu-
dents write about the "feelings [that each concept] engendered."
The final activity also emphasizes understanding conceptual knowledge. Stu-
dents are asked to find instances of the specific motifs in the play and describe
each motif's significance in the context of the play. Finding instances is exempli-
fying (hence Understand). The concern for the significance of the motifs as well
as Ms. Jackson's questions during the discussion of Act II require process cate-
gories beyond Understand. Determining significance "in the context of the
play" is attributing. Similarly, the question pertaining to Macbeth's refusal to
return to Duncan's room requires that attributions be made.
Finally, the question asking students to speculate on what would have hap-
pened if Lady Macbeth had murdered Duncan requires generating. In Table 5.1
(see inside back cover), attributing is associated with Analyze, whereas generat-
ing is related to Crea!e. Thus, although the emphasis on understanding concep-
tual knowledge continues throughout these activities, two additional cognitive
process categories are involveq: Analyze and Create. Several knowledge types
are likely to be involved in Analyzing and Creating in this instance; Factual and
Conceptual knowledge seem particularly relevan!.
Activities Related to Act 11
I allowed the class to select the lilm version they would continue to view act
by act throughout the unil. Alter some deliberation they cautiously agreed on
Polanski's (although they were less enthusiastic about his depiction 01 the
witches). Students were expected to keep a film journal (see Attachment C at
the end of the chapter), an expectation which required rather close guidance
from me.
I began the study 01 Act 11 by introducing the concept 01 motif. Students
were asked to be aware 01 three motifs as they read Act 11: blood, sleep, and
darkness. They were asked to write lor live minutes on these three terms and
the leelings they engendered, both singly and in combination.
Class sessions consisted 01 reading and discussion. Again, I used ques-
tions to guide the discussion (e.g., "Why does Macbeth reluse to return to
Duncan's room in order to plant the bloody dagger on the guards?" "What
difference would it have made il Lady Macbeth had been able to murder
Duncan hersell?")
I divided the class into three equal groups; each group was assigned one
01 the three motils. The only instruction given to the groups was to lind every
mention 01 their motil in scenes i and ii 01 Act 11 and to arrive at a consensus
regarding the signilicance 01 the motil in the context 01 the play.
The activities related to Act 11 took about a week to complete.
Activities Related to Act 111
I began the discussion 01 Act 111 by asking the students to predict what direc-
tion Macbeth would take now that he is well versed in murder. Most agreed
that he would most likely kili again, that killing would become easier and
easier lor him. Some were able to predict Banquo's murder, sensing that
Macbeth would begin to be uncomlortable with how much his Iriend already
knew.
AII 01 Act 111 was read and then discussed. Once again, I used questions
to guide the discussion (e.g., "How would you direct an actor to portray a
man leeling the constant lear that Macbeth obviously leels?" "Is the murder 01
Banquo more or less understandable than the murder of Duncan? Why or why
not?").
At this point in time, I took class time to allow students to work on their
group projects. (See Section 111, Assessment, lor examples and Attachment D at
the end 01 the chapter for scoring criteria.)
The activities related to Act 111 took about three days to complete, with the
projects requiring an additional live days.
142 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
COMMENTARY
The discussion of Act III begins by asking students to predict what will hap-
pen next. In terms of the process dimension, "predicting" is an alternative
name far inferring, and inferring is a cognitive process in the category Under-
stand (see Table 5.1). As the dass begins to read and discuss Act 1Il, Ms.
J ackson once again uses questions to guide the discussion. The first discus-
sion question ("How would you direct?") is quite complex, requmng con-
cepts from cinematography and from lhe play itself. In terms of the cogru-
tive process dimension, the focus is on the category Create. The second dlS-
cussion question requires Evaluating, with the lag "Why or why nOI?" asking
students to state lhe criteria lhey are using to make lherr Judgments. Flve addl-
lional days are spenl in dass on the major project, which is also lhe maJor
unit assessment. Ms. Jackson is borrowing instructional time for lhe purpose
of assessment, believing lhat her sludents need structured classroom time,
with supervision, to complete their projects. Creating and Evaluating in this
context quite likely require sorne combination of Conceptual and Factual
knowledge.
Activities Related to Act IV
Beeause 01 the time lag between linishing Act 111 and taking up Aet IV, I lelt the
need to do a lairly extensive review 01 lhe previous three aets belore begin-
ning Aet IV. By way 01 preparation, I asked the students to eonsider Aet IV in
the light 01 a steady downward progression lor Maebeth, who at this point is
beeoming overwhelmed with his lears and the inereasing number 01 murders
they inspire.
Following the reading 01 Aet IV, I engaged students in a dass discussion.
Aga in, a series 01 questions served as a guide (e.g., "Explain Maebeth's
reasoning in having MaeDuff's lamily killed. How does this murder diller
in eharaeter and motivation Irom others?" "Can the scene between Malcolm
and MaeDuff be rightly eriticized lor its laek 01 credibility? Why or why
not?").
The review period lasted about a day, with an additionaJ lour days spent
on Aet IV.
COMMENTARY
Once again the major dues for dassifying in lhe Taxonomy Table come from
Ms. Jackson's questions. She asks students to "explain" (Understand), "com-
pare" (Understand), and "critique" (Evaluate). Un\ike ir\ the pre~ious e~aluatio~
question, however, lhe criterion to be used by the students ID making therr
judgments (Le., credibility) is given by Ms. Jackson.
I
Chapler 9 Mncbeth Vignette 143
Activities Related to Act V
Despite the lact that Act V is composed 01 a large number 01 short scenes,
each involving complicated action and a bewildering inllux 01 numerous
minor characters, students enjoyed the fast pace and appreciated lhe rapidity
with which the play hurtles toward its end. Almost every scene umavels
more and more 01 the lalse securities with which Macbeth has surrounded
himself.
The elass delighted in the liendish ironies in the lullillment of the witches'
prophecies, and it took very little prompting lor them to see that Macbeth,
who had conlounded other characters throughout the play with the differences
between what he seemed to be and what he actually was, is now himsell the
victim 01 appearance vs. reality. (Allhough I mentioned the term ¡rony in pass-
ing, 1 considered it to be more important that these students recognize it rather
than label il. Macbeth has a "right" ending, and this all 01 the students could
understand and appreciate.)
Following the reading aloue! 01 Act V, questions such as the lollowing
were used to guide the conduding discussion. "What is Macbeth's Irame 01
mind in his lamous 'Tomorrow' soliloquy?;' "Predict what would happen il
Macbeth had relused to light MacDul1 once he learned lhe truth 01 MacDull's
birth?" "What is the effect 01 Malcolm's speech al the end 01 the play?"
COMMENTARY
Continuing wilh her emphasis on Conceptual knowledge, Ms. Jackson intro-
duces lhe concept of "irony." It is important to note !hat she is more interested
in having students understand the concept than in having lhem remember lhe
label attached to it. In Ms. Jackson's words, students should "recognize it
rather tlhan label it." To foster tlhe development 01 Conceptual knowledge, her
questions ask students to Understand (inferring and explaining) and to Analyze
(attributing).
Our analysis of tlhe instructional activities in terms of the Taxonomy Table
is summarized in Table 9.2.
PART3:AsSESSMENT
The primary assignment was a group project to complete and present to the
dass. A group consisted 01 two to four students. Examples indude: "Choose
any scene from lhe play and rewrite it, using a modern setting and languag~
but retaining the sense 01 what is said. Present the scene belore the dass."
"Create an edition of The Scotland Chronicle which deals with the news-
worlhy events of the play. Use a combination 01 news artides, leature
artides, editorials, and special features such as political cartoons, advice
columns, and want ads." The criteria lor scoring the projects are shown in
Attachment D at the end of the chapter.
9.2 ANALYSIS OF THE MACBETH VIGNETTE IN TERMS OF THE
TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
lo REMEMBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLY 4.
AHALYZE
5.
EVALUATE
Objective 2 Adivities
for
Act 11
Activities
for
Ad 111
6.
CREATE
Adivities
for
Acts 11 and 111
B.
CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE Objective 1 Introdudory activity and adivities for Ads I-V,' Film
joumal; Film
comparison
Activities
for
Ads 1/, IV,
andV
Activities
for
Acts 111
andlV
Activities
for
Ads 11
and 111
c.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
D.
MI!TA~
COGNITIVE
KNOWLEDGE
K.y
Ob~ec~ve 1 = Shtdents wiIl see the relevance of literary works such as Macbeth to their own lives.
ObJective 2 = Students wiil remember important details about the play.
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapter 9 Macbeth Vignette 145
The dues to the proper placement of fuis assignment in the Taxonomy Table
come from two sources: (1) the directions given to the students and (2) the five
criteria used to score the projects. The first example requiles interpreting (Un-
derstand) and producing (Create), whereas the second example requires differenti-
ating (Analyze) and producing (Create). Although both examples require students
to Create, different projects requile different additional process categories to be
used by the students prior to or in conjunction with the act of creating. Thus,
by virtue of student choice, sorne students are likely to work on projects that
are more complex cognitively and, hence, likely to be more difficult. AIso, con-
sistent with the first objective, the examples attempt to gel studenls lo place
Macbeth in a modern context (e.g., modem settings, a newspaper format).
If we consider the five criteria, accuracy (and perhaps thorouglmess) seerns
to caH for remembering jactual1cnowledge. Creativity seems to caH for creating
[based onlfactual and conceptual1cnowledge. The other three criteria-thorough-
ness, attractiveness, and correct form-aH seem to requile understanding concep-
tual knuwledge. Students need to know what makes a project thorough, attrac-
tive, and in correct formo Other than accuracy, then, the criteria are unrelated
to the content of the play; rather, they are related to desired qualities of the
project per se.
1 also administered a final test over Macbeth. lhe test ineludes three sections:
(1) matehing descriptions wi!h specifie characters; (2) short answers to "what,"
"where," "
w hen," IIwho/' "why," and "hoVJ many" questions; and (3) quota-
tions (for whieh students have to write who says it, to whom it is said, and
what the cireumslances surrounding it are). (See Attaehment E at the end 01
the ehapter.) lhe test was strongly "factually based" -1 eonsidered it important
that students remain aware of!he speeifie events in !he play and eould keep
the eharaeters and their relationships straight.
Both Ms. Jackson's d.iscussion about the test and a cursory examination of the
the test itself suggest that the final test clearly falls into ceH Al of the Taxonomy
Table: remember jactual1cnowledge.
At !he same time, however, 1 was more pleased wi!h the group projects and
class dramatizations, which I felt were longer-Iasting learning experiences.
Over the unit, 1 saw improvement in the ease with whieh students could come
up with a finished produet, either a long-term project or dramatization based
on only 15 minutes 01 planning.
1 have always based the "botlom line" suceess or failure of any elassroom
enterprise on sludent responses, less formal measures such as en!husiastic
146 Section ID The Taxonomy in Use
discussion and participation. As the unit progressed, students became less
reluclant to venture opinions and to volunteer to read and act out scenes
(which 1 took as a definite sign that they were not only learning but enjoying
Ihe challenge).
Apparently, challenging work was something thal happened all too infre-
quenlly in lheir academic careers. One sludent actually said to me, "1 wish we
had read sorne hard stuff before this year!" 1 took this comment as a measure
01 the uni!'s success.
COMMENTARY
Ms. Jackson "puts more faith" in projects than in tests. Thus, her first objective is
the "real" objective of the unit, whereas her second objective is included primar-
ily because it is "expected" by the sludents and/or the school system. She also
assessed the unit's effectiveness in terrns of the sludents' affective responses (i.e.,
increase in ease, increase in enthusiasm, enjoyment in challenging work).
Our analysis of the assessments in terms of the Taxonomy Table is pro-
vided in Table 9.3.
PART 4: CLOSING COMMENTARY
In this section we examine the vignette in terms of our four basic questions: the
leaming question, the instruction question, the assessment question, and the
aligrunent question.
THE LEARNING QUESTION
In terms of intended student leaming, this unit clearly focuses on helping slu-
dents understand conceptual knowledge. It is through concepts such as tragic
hero, charader defects, and irany that Ms. Jackson believes sludents will "see
the relevance of literary works ... in their own lives." Al the same time, how-
ever, Ms. Jackson is somewhat of a pragrnatist. She believes it is important for
students to rémember particular details about Macheth. Students may need to
remember these details on later tests; furthermore, there is a certain "social
value" in being able to "talk about" Macheth.
THE INSTRUCTION QUESTION
The vast majority of the time spent on this unit was devoted to activities that
relate directly or indirectly to fue fust objective. For most acts of the play, stu-
dents were engaged in activities related to the more complex cognitive process
categories: Analyze (Acts II, IV, and V); Evaluate (Acts III and IV); and Crea te
(Acts II and III). The stimulus for this engagement was teacher questioning.
9.3 ANALYSIS OF THE MACBETH VIGNETTE IN TERMS OF THE
TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON ASSESSMENTS
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE
DIMENSION
A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
lo
AI!MEMBER
Objective 2
Final test
Project (1
2. UNDERSTAND Project In1
3.
ApPLY
4.
ANALYZE
Activities
far Act 11
Project In2
5.
EVALUATE
Activities
far Act 111
B.
CONCEP"UAL
KNOWLEDGE
Activities
far Acts 1/,
Iv, and V
Project In2
Activities
far Acts 111
andlV
6 .
CREATE
Activities
far Acts 11
and 111
Project In1;
Project In2
Activities
far Acts 11
and 111
Project In1;
Project In2;
Project C3
C.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
D.
META-
COGNITIVE
KNOWLItDGE
~~ective 1 = 5tudcnts will see the rele."ance of literal)' works such as Macbeth to their own lives.
Objective 2 = 5tudents will remember unportant details about the play. . .
Project Inl = Instructions: Choose any scene and rewrite with mo?em ~guag~ m modern settmg.
Project ln2 = Instructions: Create an edition of The Scolland Chromcle deahng Wlth newsworthy events.
Project Cl = Criteria: accuracy. . . .
Projects e2, 3, 4, and 5 = Criteria: thoroughness, creativlty. attract~veness,. correct ~o:m' .
Dark shading indica tes the strongest alignment-an objective, an mstructional activlty, and an assessment are all present In the same
cell. Lighter shading indicates two of the three are present.
!
, ,
148 Section lIT The Taxonorny in Use
Because Ihese cognitive process categories are not included in Ihe statement of
objectives or on the assessment, we believe Ms. Jackson used Ihem in an at-
tempt to increase her students' understanding of the play. This is a good illus-
tration of the use of more complex cognitive processes in an effort to help stu-
dents more thoroughly achieve less complex objectives. The intent in such
instances is not mastery of Ihe complex processes sufficient for them to be in-
cluded as unit objectives, but just enough practice wilh Ihem to result in deeper
processing of Ihe students' understanding.
It is interesting to note Ihat not a single instructional activity related di-
rectly to Ihe second objective (Le., Students will remember important details of
Ihe play). Students apparently were expected to acquire this knowledge as Ihey
watched the film, read and acted out the play, and participated in Ihe various
activities.
THE ASSESSMENT qUEsTION
The two formal assessments were the group project and the final unit test.
These two assessments lay at opposite ends of the cognitive process contin-
uum, with Ihe group project requiring Create and the test Remember. Only one
of the five criteria used to evaluate Ihe group project focuses on Create. Two of
the criteria focus on the content of the play: accuracy and thoroughness. The
olher two criteria emphasize the form of Ihe finished product: attractiveness
and correct formo
Table 9.3 shows sorne inconsistency between the instructions given to Ihe
students for completing the project (Inl and In2), which appear in cells A2, B2,
A4, B4, A6, and B6, and Ihe criteria used to evaluate Ihe completed projects (Cl
through CS), which appear in cells Al, B2, and B6. One would expect Ihe in-
structions and criteria to be classified in Ihe same cell. Instead, Ihey are in two
cells: B2 (understand conceptual knowledge) and B6 (create [based on] conceptual
knowledge). However, Ihe instructions are placed in four cells Ihat have no crite-
ria: A2 (understand factual knowledge), A4 (analyze [based onlfactual knowledge),
B4 (analyze [based on] conceptual knowledge), and A6 (create [based on] factual
knowledge). Further, one criterion is in a cell Ihat has no instructions: Al (remem-
ber factual knowledge). Students could Ihus have trouble if Iheir expectations for
what counts toward a grade lead Ihem to concentrate Iheir efforls to Ihe exclu-
sion of olher important aspects, such as not studying Ihe factual knowledge as-
pects of Ihe play.
THE ALIGNMENT qUESTION
We can clearly see Ihe alignment of objectives, instructional activities, and
assessments in Table 9.3. The final test is aligned with the second objective,
remembering important facts about the play. As mentioned aboye, how-
ever, no instructional activities relate directly to eilher Ihe objective or Ihe final
test.
Chapler 9 Macbeth Vignette 149
There is reasonable alignment between the instructional activities and the
group project. As mentioned earlier, Ms. Jackson allocated five days of class-
room time for students to work on Ihe project. In addition, most of the instruc-
tional activities focused on helping students develop Conceptual knowledge (row
B of the Taxonomy Table).
The misalignment is more evident when we consider the cells of Table 9.3
ralher Ihan the rows and columns. For example, although most of the instruc-
tional activities emphasize Conceptual knowledge, they differ in the cognitive
processes they demand from students. In many cases, Ihese demands are be-
yond Understanding, which is Ihe target of Ihe second objective. As we men-
tioned earlier, however, it may well be Ihat Ms. Jackson was attempting to de-
velop a deeper and more enduring understanding by getting students to work
al Ihe so-called higher cognitive levels. Sirnilarly, allhough the Create column
contains both instructional activities and assessments, it does not contain an
objective. It seems reasonable that Understand (the cognitive process in the ob-
jective) should be one of Ihe criteria used to assess the group project.
PART 5: CLOSING QUESTIONS
As wilh the analysis of all our vignettes, we were left with a few unanswered
questions. We raise two of Ihe most important in this' closing section.
1. Whal is!he role of!he more complex cognitive process categories in
!he development of Conceptual knowledge? Ms. Jackson wanted to help
students see relationships between Ihe play and their own lives. The
palhway to accomplishing Ihis objective was to use Conceptual knowledge.
Most students know "tragic heroes"; they experience "irony." Concepts
such as Ihese enable Ihem to make Ihe connections desired by Ms. Jackson.
Allhough her focus was on understanding conceptual knowledge, Ms. Jackson
engaged her students in discussions at higher levels of cognitive process-
ing (e.g., Analyze, Evaluate, and Create). It seems reasonable to assume
that Conceptual knowledge can be developed via Ihese activities.
2. What are the advantages and disadvantages of student choice of adivi-
ties and assignments? Ms. Jackson gave her studenls choices several
times during the unit. For example, she let Ihem choose which film to
watch for Ihe entire unit. This was an informed choice; Ihat is, it was based
on a comparison of Ihe same scene presented in three different film ver-
sions of Macbeth (see Attachment A). Students also had a choice of group
projects. In this case, however, students were undoubtedly unaware of the
differences in cognitive demands among Ihe projects as suggested by our
analysis (see Table 9.3). Quite by accident, differenl groups of students
could have chosen less complex or more complex assignments, less diffi-
cult or more difficult ones. Because Ihe same scoring guide was used for
all assignments, Ihis choice of assignments could result in differences
in Ihe grades students earned simply because of Ihe assignmenls, not
150 Section m The Taxonomy in Use
ATTACHMENT A
CHART COMPARING THREE FILM
VERSIONS OF MACBETH
because of the quality of their work. Teachers often try to compensate for
this in assessment, but it is difficult.
The two instances of student choice are quite different. In the fust
case, student choice of film is based on information and group consensus.
As such, it quite likely contributed to inereased interest and ownership on
the part of students. In the second instance, choice of group project is per-
haps a confounding factor in the grades assigned to them. The proper use
of student choice and the amount oí information students need to make
"good" choices, as well as the implications oí different student choices for
achieving various objectives and for grading, are issues that need addi-
tional consideration by teachers and researchers.
-
Roman Polanski OrsonWelles BBC
Seltlng
Sound
lighting
Special Effects
Witches
Macbeth
lady Macbeth
ATTACHMENT B A COMPARISON/CONTRAST ESSAY ON
THREE FILM VERSIONS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE'S MACBETH
ATTACHMENT C MACBETH FILM JOURNAL
,. The introduction should address the questions 01 what a good film version 01 Maebeth should ean-
tain. The introduetion should also take steps to engage the interest 01 the reader.
2. The thesis slalement is the most importanl part 01 the intraduetion. The thesis should locus on
einematic effects (se!ting, sound, lighting, special effects) and characterization (Maebeth, lady Mae
beth, Ihe witches) in !he seenes viewed from each 01 the three films. Statements should be made re
garding the relative merits 01 each film.
3. The body 01 !he essay should develop the ideas established in the Ihesis statemenl. Use either Ihe
block lorm (eaeh film discussed separately) or the subjeet lorm (the cínematies effects 01 eaeh film
are diseussed, then Ihe eharacterization).
4. The conclusion should restate the main idea and end with a statement as to which lilm version is
the mosl effective and true to the play's purpose.
Write introduction here:
APproximately five elass sessions will be devoted to watching Ihe selected lilm version 01 Maebeth,
ane viewing session after we finish reading and discussing each act in dass. Each student is asked to
keep a journal 01 his or her impression~ opinions, and questions about the film. There should be one
entry lar each day al reviewing, eaeh 01 1 to 2 paragraphs.
The eortent 01 the journal is primarily up to you, bu! effort should be made to address certain eriteria.
As was done in the comparisonlcontrast essays wrjtten earlier, students should comment regarding
the cinematography (se!ting, lighting, sound, special effects) and eharacterization (especially Macbeth,
lady Maclbelh, Banquo, MaeDuff, and the witches). Other points to consider would be how eertain
episades are staged-for example, Ihe dagger seene, the banquet scene, the sleepwalking seene, and
Maebeth's murder. Also, il there are any scenes left out or ehanged in any signifieant way, Ihis needs
to be addressed in the journal.
The last journal entry should state what you lound most effective in the movie and what you objected
the mast. Remember there are no right or wrong opinions, but any apinion must be based on evidence.
152
153
ATTACHMENT D TEACHER ASSESSMENT OF
GROUP PRO.JECTS
ATTACHMENT E FINAL TEST
Researeh
Aeeuraq (30%)
lhorooghness (30%)
Presentati on
Creativity (15%)
Attractiveness (15%)
Corree! forrn (10%)
1. Malehing: Match Ihe lollowing with Ihe names lO the right. Sorne names will be used more Ihan once. (2 points eaeh)
1. Is execuled and lorfeits his tille to Maebeth.
A . H eeale
2. Reveal s his suspicion 01 Maroeth's guill by nol attending Ihe coronation.
B . Dunean
3. Is seen approaehing Maebeth's eastle, lo his great horror and disbelief.
4. Is Ihe cause of Macbeth's "ftt" al Ihe banquet
5. elaims lo be even more evil than Maebeth.
6. Is the Thane of File.
7. Names Maleolm, Prinee of eumberland.
B. Often brings bad news lo the other eharaet"".
9. Maebelh's eastle.
10. Is killed by Macbeth during Macbeth's fina l battle.
11. Will "gel" kings.
12. Smears blood on King Dunean's sleeping guards.
13. G i ves instructions to trap Maebeth wilh a false sense of security.
14. Flees lo Ireland to avoid being unjustly aeeused of murder.
15. Is angl)' al being left alone without proleelion.
16. Kil ls Dunean's guards.
t 7. Is reported lo have eommitted suicide at the end of the play.
lB. Was "untimely ripp'd" from his molher's womb.
19. Barely escapes being murdered at the same lim e as his lather.
20. Is with Maebeth when he fi rsl sees the witehes.
C. Maleolm
D . Banquo
E. Lady Maebeth
F. lady MacOuff
G . Dunsinane
H. Maebelh
1. MaeDuff
J. Ross
K. Y oung S iward
l. F leanee
M. Thane 01 eawdor
N. Banquo's ghost
O. Birnam Wood
P . Donalbain
TOTAl
(eontinued)
155
154
ATTACHMENT E FINAL TEST (CONTINUED)
I/. Short Answer. Fil! in Ihe blanks wi lh Ihe eorreel word or phrase. (3 poin'" eaeh)
1. Whal eountry is Ihe main setling 01 Macbeth?
2. Whal is Machelh's tragie flawl
3. Whal does the helmeted head tell Maebeth lo beware DI?
4. Why does lady Maebelh nol kili Duncan hersel!?
5. How many apparilions do Ihe wilehes show Maebelhl
6. What is Ihe only comie seene in Macbeth?
7. What does Macbelh think he sees jusI belore Dunean's murder?
8. When does Ihe old man report Ihat there were greal di sturbances in nature?
9. Where does Malcolm go alter his lalher is killedl
10. Who observes lady Maebelh walking in her sleepl
IS6
ATTACHMENT E FINAL TEST (CONTINUED)
II/. Quoles. In romplele senlenees tell (1) who says il, (2) lo whom il is said, and (3) what Ihe
circumstances are. (5 points each)
, .
"lay on, MacDuff, and damned be him !ha! first cries,
'H old, enough!'"
2. "F air is loul. and loul is fair:
3. "Fail not ourfeasl."
4.
"Is Ihi s a dagger I see before me, Ihe handle toward my hand?"
5.
"look like Ihe innocenl flower, but be Ihe serpen! under il:
6 .• Out, damned spo!! Out, I say! "
157
CHAPTER 10
Addition Facts Vignette
This unit on strategies for memorizing addition facts that sum to 18 or less was
developed and taught by Ms. Jeanna Hoffman.
The unit is part 01 the sehool distriet's second-grade eore eurrieulum, and ad-
dition laets are induded on the eurrently used standardized test. The unit is
taught early in the year. There is so mueh to teaeh in the eore eurrieulum that
it is benelieial to teaeh students how to memorize these laets early in the year.
It is more effieient lor students to have the basie laets memorized belore they
move on to the whole-number addition (and subtraetion) algorithms. Students
already have been exposed to the eoneept 01 addition (in lirst grade and again
earlier in second grade) through the use 01 manipulatives. Memorizing addi-
tion laets is diffieult lor many students. Usually, a handlul 01 students begin
second grade knowing all 01 the addition laets to 18. Most students have a
good understanding 01 addition laets to 10. Once sums to 18 are begun,
however, well over hall the students use their lingers. Some still do by the
end 01 second grade.
Generally, the dass olseeond graders contains lrom 20 to 24 students.
The dasses tend to be heterogeneous in terms 01 aehievement, and the stu-
dents, lor the most part, are motivated. The unit lasts approximately three
weeks depending on the students' previous experiences with memorizing
addition laets. It would be better to spend more time on this objeetive, but
there are so many other objectives to caver in the curriculum. Review of
many 01 the memorization strategies will take place throughout the sehool
year to remind students 01 them and to see whether they are retained and
being used.
PART 1: OS.JECTIVES
The major objeetive 01 this three-week unit is that students will reeall addition
laets (sums to 18) without manipulatives. The longer-term objeetives are to
help students (1) understand the effieieney 01 memorization (in eertain eireum-
stanees) and (2) gain a working knowledge 01 various memorization strategies.
In concrete terms, students should be able to compute horizontal and vertical
158
Chapter 10 Addition Facts Vignette 159
sums. The sums are 01 both two and three single-digit whole numbers (pro-
vided they do not exeeed 18). Examples would indude:
6+7 = 5+7+3= 7 4
+9 +5
+5
COMMENTARY
In terms of the Taxonomy Table, the major objective of the unit is straightfor-
ward: remember factual knowledge. The other two "Ionger-term" objeetives are
examples of understand metacognitive knowledge (specifically, knowledge of gen-
eral strategies and knowledge about cognitive tasks) and apply procedural
knowledge (assuming that "working knowledge" refers to knowledge that can
be used or applied). The "various memorization strategies" constitute Proce-
dural knowledge. Note that we classify this third objective as Procedural knowl-
edge rather!han Metacognitive knowledge because the "strategies" are specifie to
memorizing "math faets" (including addition, subtraetion, multiplieation, and
division). Thus, the "strategies" have limited generalizability. The Metacogni-
tive knowledge component comes from students understanding which strategies
ate most and least effective for them personally.
The placement of these three objectives in the Taxonomy Table is shown in
Table 10.1.
PART 2: INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
"Poeket laets" is an activity that begins the unit and is ongoing throughout it.
Eaeh day, as students enter the dassroom, they piek a "Iaet strip" lrom a bas-
ket. Eaeh student is expeeted to memorize this laet. Periodieally, during the
day, students are asked to recite their laets. Parents, the principal, eustodians,
ealeteria workers, and others know about the laets and can ask the students to
recite them. The next moming eaeh student writes his or her laets in his or her
"poeket laets" book and pieks a new laet.
COMMENTARY
"Pocket facts" emphasizes remembering factual knowledge. This activity takes
place every day.
"Mad Math Minute" is an aetivity that begins the seeond week olsehool
and eontinues daily throughout the sehool year. The students have one minute
to complete 30 addition exereises. Halfway through the year, this is inereased
to 35. Mad Math Minute sheets are eonstrueted so that within an eight-day
period, students begin with exereises having a 2 as one 01 the addends, then
10.1 ANALYSIS OF THE ADDITION FACTS VIGNETTE IN TERMS
OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON STATED OBJECTIVES
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
1. REME:MBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLY 4.
ANALY%E
S.
EVALUATE
6.
CREATE COMMENTARY
Objective 1
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
COMMENTARY
C.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 3
D. ,
META~
COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 2
COMMENTARY
Key
Objective 1 = Recall addition facts (sums to 18).
Objective 2 = Understand the efficiency of memorization (in certam circumstances).
Objective 3 = Gain a working knowledge of various memonzation strategies.
Chapter 10 Addition Facts Vignette 161
move to 3, then to 4, and 50 on. O nce the +9 laets are done, the process
begins again with + 1. The num ber 01 exereises eaeh student gets eorreet is
posted dail y in the room.
This year-Iong aetivity also foeuses ón remembering factual knowledge. The strict
time limil (30 lo 35 faets in one minute) virtually requires memorizalion.
Days 1-4
Alter these initial daily activities have been performed, the first lour days 01
the unit are spent completing the Great Addition Wall Chart. In advanee, I
prepare an outline lor the ehart using 3' X 7' buteher papero The numbers O
through 9 are written along the top and lelt side. The students use two eolors
01 Linker Cubes to make stieks and leam to say the addilion laets they repre-
senl. They then write the laets in the appropriate cells 01 Ihe charl. By the
end 01 the seeond day, the ehart is lilled in eompletely. I tell the students
there are 100 lacts they will need to leam by Ihe end 01 seeond grade and
over the next several days they'lI be leaming strategies lo help Ihem memo-
rize these laets.
Although the major objective slates "without manipulatives," Ms. Hoffman
uses manipulatives early in fue unit. The manipulatives enable students to
"see" concrete examples of fue additionfacts. The emphasis is on tite meaning
of 5, tite meaning of 3, tite meaning of 8, and so on. Thus, !he aetivity promotes
understanding conceptual knowledge.
During the third and lourth days I ask sludents lo look lor patterns and re-
lationships among the laets included onthe Great Add ition Wall Chart. For
example, the + 0 row and column are pointed out. Students are asked lo
explain how they already know these lacts without eounting. Similarly, the
+ 1 row and eolumn are examined.
Also, the commutative propérty is illustrated (e.g., 5 + 8 ~ 13 and
8 + 5 ~ 13). I tell the students that il they know one 01 the Iwo laets, they
know the other. I conclude Ihe activity by poinling out how many faets Ihey
already know by virtue 01 the +0 row and eolumn, Ihe +1 row and column,
and the eommutalive property. They will need to memorize the rest.
This activity, in part, has a motivational purpose. Ms. Hoffman wants to show
students how much tltey already know and, tltus, how "little" tltey have yel to
162 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
leam. In terms of the Taxonomy Table, the search for pattems involves compar-
ing and the commutative property is a principIe. Thus, the emphasis here is on
understanding conceptual knowledge. Note that Ms. Hoffman does not use the
phrase "commutative property" with the students. She is more interested in
students understanding that "the order of numbers is not important when you
add" than recalling the name "commutative property."
Days 5--6
"Faet Friends" is an aetivity that takes place on the lifth and sixth days. In this
activity students use "doubles laets" (whieh they usually know) to help them
remember other addition laets. I ask students to look for patterns in the Great
Addition Wall Chart, in the rows, and in the columns. I ehoose one student to
point out the doubles laets (e.g., 3 + 3,4 + 4) and to circJe them. I tell the
students that on the ehart there are speeial "Iaet Iriends." I use the doubles
laet 4 + 4 = 8 as an example and write it on the board. On either side I write
3 + 4 = 7 and 5 + 4 = 9.
I ask the students why I eall these "faet Iriends." (The answer is that they
all have +4 in them.) I repeat this illustration with other doubles laets. Stu-
dents are asked what they notiee about the plaeement 01 these laet Iriends on
the ehar!. (The answer is that they toueh either on the sides or at the top and
bottom.)
I then ask students how knowing one "faet Iriend" helps to know the
others. As students share their thoughts, other students begin to eateh on. I re-
fer baek to the Great Addition Wall Chart and have different students point out
the laet Iriends around all 01 the doubles laets. I place check marks aeeord-
ingly. I believe that this aetivity introduces the idea that mathematies is a net-
work 01 relationships. It helps make faets and mathematies operations easier to
remember and a lot more sen se.
COMMENTARY
Like the preceding activity, these activities involve students looking for pat-
tems and relationships. In terms of the Taxonomy Table, then, the emphasis is
on understanding conceptual knowledge (more specifically, comparing knowledge
of structures).
Days 7-8
On the seventh and eighth days, I introduce students to "Iact lamilies." In this
aetivity, students are asked to look cJosely at three numbers in an equation and
explore other arrangements 01 these numbers to see relationships. I write an
equation on the board (e.g., 2 + 3 = 5). Students are asked il they can ehange it
COMMENTARY
Chapler 10 Addition Facts Vignette 163
around to make another addition lact (e.g., 3 + 2 = 5). Students are then asked
il they can make a subtraetion laet with these same numbers (e.g., 5 - 2 = 3).
(Students generally need help with this. C/ues sueh as "slart with the largest num-
ber" are helpful.)
I then draw an out/ine of a house around the two addition faets and the
two subtraetion faets and write the numerals 2, 3, and 5 in the "attie." I tell the
students that these lour equations (Iaets) belong to the same laet lamily and are
the only laets that can live in this house. I then draw an out/ine 01 a house and
place the numerals 4, 5, and 9 in the attic. Students are asked to work in pairs
to identily the laet lamily lor the house. Students continue to work in pairs to
draw other houses. ("Doubles" live in apartments sinee there are only two
numbers, e.g., 8, 16.)
I remind students that il they learn one 01 the faets in a lamily they'II know
the others. Therelore, laet lamilies make the job 01 memorizing easier beeause
they only have to remember hall 01 the laets. During the second day 01 this ae-
tivity, I lead a cJosing diseussion that is intended to help students realize that
subtraetion is the opposite 01 addition.
As on the earlier days, students are asked to explore the relationships inherent
in equations (e.g., change them around, seek connections). Without using the
phrase "additive inverse," Ms. Hoffman introduces students to this important
concept within the equations. This activity is classified as understanding concep-
tual knowledge. Ms. Hoffman's prompt-"start with the largest number"-can
be viewed as the fust slep in a procedure lhal studenls can use lo transform ad-
dition facls into subtraction facls. If she conlinues to build this procedure, the
classification would be applying procedural knowledge.
The reminder in the closing paragraph retums the students to Ms. Hoff-
man' s main objective: remembering addition facts that sum lo 18 or less.
Nonetheless, the inslruction during the firsl eighl days has emphasized under-
standing conceptual knowledge. Her final discussion on Day 8 reinforees the con-
cepl of "additive inverse."
Days 9-10
On the ninth and tenth days, I engage students in a procedure that I call
"make-a-ten." I begin by writing several addition exereises with 9 as the ad-
dend on the board. Eaeh student is given a "ten-Irame" (a pieee 01 paper with
two rows of five boxes). I ask the students to use two ten-Irames to lind a way
to quiekly ligure out the answer to the lirst exercise (e.g., 9 + 7 = ). [The an-
swer is that this is (9 + 1) on one ten-Irame, + 6 on the other, whieh is 10 + 6
or 16.] I continue with all the exereises in whieh 9 and 8 are addends.
164 Section ID The Taxonorny in Use
I ask the students to record both the exereises and their answers on a
separate pieee 01 papero We then diseuss how the make-a-ten strategy works.
I then point to the Great Addition Wall Chart and ask them how the make-
a-ten proeedure can help them memorize their addition laets.
COMMENTARY
This is a "cognitively rieh" aclivity. Studenls are asked lo apply procedural
knowledge (i.e., earry oul lhe make-a-len proeedure), understand procedural
knowledge (i.e., discuss how lhe make-a-len proeedure works), and understand
metacognitive knowledge (i.e., describe how proeedures like make-a-len ean help
lhem memorize knowledge like lheir addition faels).
Days 11-13
During the 11th through 13th days, I explore with the students the use 01 vari-
ous approaehes lor memorizing addition laets whose sums are greater than
10. I begin by writing the exercise 5 + 8 on the board and ask the students
how they eould lind the answer. Answers should inelude counting up; using
lingers, objeets, a ea/culator, or number line; using the make-a-ten strategy;
relying on laet lamilies; and memorizing through praetiee (e.g., poeket laets,
Mad Math Minute). Eaeh student is asked to either suggest an approaeh or
ehoose one 01 those already suggested.
Eaeh student then uses the approaeh he or she suggested (or ehose) to per-
lorm the exereise (i.e., 5 + 8) and shares the strategy as it applies to that exer-
eise with the elass. As students explore and use the different strategies, I believe
they will see that the lastest way to get the answer is having memorized il.
COMMENTARY
The focus of lhese three days is on lhe many ways studenls ean approaeh learn-
ing addition faels lhal sum lo 18 or less. Bolh Conceptual knowledge (e.g., fael
families) and Procedural knowledge (e.g., make-a-len) are available for studenls'
use. Regardless of lhe type of knowledge, lhere is liUle doubtlhal lhe eognitive
proeess is Apply. Thus, studenls are lo apply conceptual and/or procedural knowl-
edge. In Chapler 5, Apply is defined in lerms of Procedural knowledge; lhal is,
Conceptual knowledge is generally "unpaeked" as embedded in a series of sleps
(i.e., Procedural knowledge) before il is applied. Thus, we classify this aetivity (or
sel of aetivities) as applying procedural knowledge.
Ultimalely, however, Ms. Hoffman wanls individual sludenls lo know
whieh approaeh works besl for lhem and eome lo lhe realization lhal lhe mosl
effieienl means of performing lhe addition exercises in lhe lime available is lo
memorize lhem. Wilh this inlenl, lhe goal has beeome understanding metacogni-
tive knowledge.
10.2 ANALYSIS OF THE ADDITION FACTS VIGNETTE IN TERMS OF
THE TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
.
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
1. REMEMBER Objective 1
Days 1-15
activities
2. UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLY 4.
ANALYZE
5.
EVALUATE
6.
CREATE
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Days 1-10
activities
c.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE Days 9-10 activities Objective 3
Days9-13
activities
D.
META-
COGNITIVE KNOWLEDGE
Objective 2
Days 9-13
activities
Key
Objective 1 = Recall addition facts (suros to 18).
Objective 2 = Understand the efficiency of mem?rization (~ce~ain circ~tances).
Objective 3 = Gain a working knowledge of vanous memonzation strateg¡es.
166 Section III The Taxonorny in Use
Days 14-15
The final activity takes place during the final two days 01 the unit. This activ-
ity requires students to put their memorization work into practice in a relay
race lormat. In advance, I prepare strips of paper containing all the addition
lacts and place them randomly into lour baskets. The class is divided into
four teams and each team is in a line lacing their basket. Each student draws
a strip lrom the basket, studies it, and puts it away. The lirst student in line
walks backward to the board, writes the lact, returns to the line, and taps the
shoulder 01 the next persono This student then picks another lact lrom the
basket and begins memorizing it. After a specified amount of time, l/time" is
called and the game ends. AII teams with all correct lacts win! The game is
repeated.
COMMENTARY
In large part because the element of speed has been introduced, the final activ-
ity is classified as rernernber factual knowledge. Considering all of the unit activi-
ties, we praduced Table 10.2. For ease of comparison, the stated objectives fram
Table 10.1 are listed in bold type in Table 10.2. The instructional activity analy-
sis is italicized.
PART 3: ASSESSMENT
To assess student progress, I observed students, asked them questions, noted
changes in the results of the daily Mad Math Minute, and scored their weekly
quizzes. I observed students to determine which approaches they were using
to arrive at answers. I noted that those students who completed the assign-
ments quickly were beginning to memorize the addition lacts. Slower students
often began by counting on their fingers and then moved to "counting up." For
these students, I try to get them to use lact Iriends and lact lamilies.
During class, I often ask students how they ligured out an answer. As the
unil progresses, students more often report they knew because 01 lact families
or lact friends and, ultimately, because they had it memorized.
Daily Mad Math Minute scores gradually improve lor most students. This
linding also suggests that students are memorizing the facts. Mad Math Minute
s.cores are posted daily so students can see how many they answered correctly
the previous day and, thus, chart their progress. As mentioned earlier, Mad
Math Minute is used throughout the year.
The weekly quizzes provide the least information on the approaches that
students use to get the answers. They are direct assessments 01 the unit objec-
tive, however, and are useful in providing information to students' parents. Ini-
tially I use a simple rubric (Le., "is beginning to memorize addition facts" or
"needs work memorizing addition facts") to inform students and their parents
how the students are progressing.
10.3 ANALYSIS OF THE ADDITION FACTS VIGNETTE IN TERMS
OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON ASSESSMENTS
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
1. REMEMBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLY 4.
ANALYZE
5.
EVALUATE
6.
CREATE
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Days 1-10
activities
c.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
Days 9-10
activities
D.
META-
COGNITIVE
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 2
Days9-13
activities
Key
Objective 1 = Recall addition facts (sums to 18).
Objective 2 = Understand the efficiency of memorization (in certain circumstances).
Objective 3 = Gain a working knowledge of various memorization strategies.
Assess 1 = Observations of students.
Assess 2 = Questions to students in class.
Assess 3 = Mad Math Minutes.
Assess 4 = Week1y quizzes. .
Dark shading indicates the strongest aligrunent-an objective, an instructional activity¡ and an assessment are al! present m the same
cell. Lighter shading indicates two of the three are present.
168 Section ID The Taxonomy in Use
COMMENTARY
Ms. Hoífman's questions focus on applying procedural krwwledge. Through these
assessments she is able lo determine wmch procedures students are using. The
changes in Mad Math Minute scores over time provide evidence of student im-
provement in remembering factual knowledge. Unlike the Mad Math Minutes,
wmch are organized around a single addend, exercises on the weekly quizzes
are drawn somewhat randomly from the universe of addition íacts. Also, un-
like the Mad Math Minule, the quizzes have more liberal time alloeations. As a
consequence, studenls have sufficienl lime lo use a variety oí approaches.
Nonetheless, the emphasis remains on remembering factual mowledge.
The results oí our analysis are shown in Table 10.3. Once again, initial
analysis of the stated objectives is shown in bold type and analysis of the in-
structional activities is shown in italics.
PART 4: CLOSING COMMENTARY
In this section we examine the vignette in terms of our four basic questions: the
learning queslion, Ihe instruction question, Ihe assessment queslion, and the
alignment question.
THE LEARNING QUESTION
In terms of the learning question, we distinguish between what we term
"foeus" and "emphasis." The focus is elearly on remembering factual mowledge.
Tms is quite clearly Ihe desired end result oí Ihe three-week unit. The íocus is
evident in both the stated objectives and the assessmenls. In contrast, Ihe em-
phasis is on understanding conceptual mowledge. With the brief exception of the
Mad Malh Minute, virtually all Ihe activities in which students engaged dur-
ing the first two weeks (approximately two-thirds) of Ihe unit emphasize un-
derstanding conceptual mowledge. This discrepancy between íocus and emphasis
can perhaps best be explained by the difíerence between means and ends. For
Ms. Hoffman, Ihe end (her focus) is e1ear: students are to remember factual
mowledge. On Ihe knowledge dimension, Conceptual, Procedural, and to a cer-
tain extent Metacognitive mowledge are means to this end. Similarly, on Ihe cog-
nitive process dimension, Understand and Apply are Ihe means. Thus, Ihe
emphasis in the unit reflecls Ihe means by which the end will be acrueved.
THE INSTRUCTION QUESTION
Primarily because of Ihe Mad Malh Minute activity, some instructional activi-
ties related to the major objective (remember factual mowledge) took place every
day. Activities related to the two longer-term objectives were reserved for the
end of the unit (i.e., Days 9-13). As shown in Table 10.2, numerous activities are
placed in cells of Ihe Taxonomy Table that do not contain the stated objectives.
In her description oí Ihese activities, Ms. Hoffman suggesled that they were in-
Chapler 10 Addition Facls Vignette 169
tended to help students develop a framework for efficient memorization. The
activities during Ihe first two weeks, for example, focused largely on under-
standing conceptual knowledge. lnherent in the structure of the Great Add.tion
Wall Chart, for example, were patterns and connections that could make mem-
orization easier.
Similarly, Ms. Hoffman introduced a variety of memorization strategies lo
her students. Her intention was for students to (1) choose the one or ones most
useful to them, and (2) come to realize !hat memorization is more efficient than
alternative ways of arriving at an answer. These activitíes had a dual foeus: ap-
ply procedural mowledge and understand metacognitive mowledge. .
Finally, what is interesting here is what Ms. Hoffman d.d not do. She d.d
not give students a steady diet of "drill and practice." Rather, she made use of
five ceIls oí the Taxonomy Table (see Table 10.2) even though her intended
learning for her students fell into a single cell.
THE ASSESSMENT QUESTION
Ms. Hoffman used both informal and formal assessments. She observed her
students and asked Ihem questíons in class to gather information about Ihe
procedures they used to remember the addition facts. She used Mad Math~utes
and weekly quizzes to get at the "bottom line" -had studenls memonzed
the addition faets? Thus, the informal assessments were intended to get infor-
mation about the process; the formal assessments were intended to get infor-
mation about the outcome.
THE ALIGNMENT QUESTION
As we show in Table 10.3, the alignment of assessmenls and instructional ae-
tivities with the stated objeelives is fairly strong. Cells Al and C3 indude an
objeetive, several activities, and assessments. As deseribed aboye, the assess-
ments in eell Al (remember factual mowledge) were more formal; those m eell C3
(apply procedural mowledge) were more informal.
OnIy a few examples of misaligruI\ent oceur. Ms. Hoffman has n~ f~rmal
assessment of understanding metacognitive knowledge, although she dld mfor-
mally assess how students wete arriving at answers and inferring processes: It
is not elear if she evaluated (or taught) whether students saw usmg analogIes
as applicable to other than addition facts. Several activities in cells B2 (under-
stand conceptual knowledge) and C2 (understand procedural mowledge) have no as-
sociated objective or assessment. The lalter supports the distu:'ction between
emphasis and focus that we made in our discussion of the learnmg questton.
PART S: CLOSING QUESTIONS
As with the analysis of all our vignettes, we were left with a few unanswered
questions. We raise three of the most important in tms closing section.
170 Section III The Taxonorny in Use
1. What is fue re~ationship between understanding conceptual knowledge
and remembenng factual knowledge? The assumption fuat understanding
underlying conceptual knowledge helps one to remember factual knowledge
]jes at fue heart of Ms. Hoffman's appmaeh to planning and teaehing this
umt. Would a constant emphasis on memorization strategies (such as re-
hearsal strategies) prove to be equally or more effective in producing the
desIred result? An answer to this question would help us understand fue
relationship between Factual and Conceptual knowledge as well as fue role
of Understanding in Remembering.
Consistent with Oill emphasis on fue importance of the more complex
cogmtive processes, Ms. Hoffrnan introduced students to these proeesses
early in their schaol eareers. Furtherrnore, she helped them learn early that
as complex matenalls mastered conceptually , its use afien becomes auto-
matico (Ineidentally, in doing so, she used interesting and motivating aetivi-
~es that r7 heve the tedium of drill and praetiee-an insight fuat may come
m ha~dy m other heavy memorization subjects such as foreign languages.)
Fmally, Ms. Hoffman introduced her students to mathematieal con-
eepts they will encounter in later grades, an aspeet not examined when
we foeus the Taxonomy Table on the unit leve!. The Taxonomy Table can
be used, however, for grade-Ievel planning and even multigrade planning.
Indeed, when one IS dealing with objectives lhat require lengthy periods
of development, the table may be an especially helpful tool for examining
when, where, and how efforts to develop them should be scheduled .
2. Would direct assessment of understanding conceptual knowledge haye
been useful in separating what student. undersland from what they are
able lo do? It is hard to determine whether the students are really devel-
opmg a conceptual knowledge of number relationships and mathematieal
procedures. They clearly are learning their number faets, but are Ihey
learnmg about number eoneepts? Stated somewhat differently, i. it likely
lhat students who do not understand "faet families" would use "faet
familles" to aid their memorization of addition faets? A set of exercises
that focus exclusively on "fact families" would allow the teaeher to distin-
guish between students who understand but do not use a strategy and
Ihose who do not understand and therefore, perhaps, cannot use il. This
inf~rmahon would help us understand Ihe role of understanding conceptual
knowledge in applying procedural knowledge.
3. Wha! i.nformation would a direct assessment of understanding meta-
cognttive knowledge haye yielded? Inherent in the infonnation Ihat Ms.
Hoffman obtained from her observations and questions of students
IS a continuum of development that begins with "counting on fingers,"
moves to ': eounting up," moyes furfuer (generally with her assistance)
to eXamImng the strueture of addition faets, and eulminates with memo-
rization. Interviews wilh students at various stages may provide useful
information about the pmgression toward memorization and the mle of
Metacognitive knowledge in this progression.
CHAPTER 11
Parliamentary Acts Vignette
This vignette, developed and taught by Ms. Gwendolyn K. Airasian, describes
a unit that integrates colonial history prior to the Revolutionary War and a per-
suasive writing assignment.
I have taught for 17 years, the past 10 in lilth grade in a suburban middle
sehool. Students are heterogeneously grouped into dasses, with 26 students
in my dass, 16 males and 10 lemales. Five students have special learning
needs and receive part-time support lrom aides when they are with me. The
remaining students present a broad range of abilities, interests, and motivation.
Both persuasive writing and colonial history are required tapies in the dis-
trie!'s lilth-grade curriculum. I teach persuasive writing at various junctures
lrom the middle to the end 01 the schaol year. As part of our writing program,
students are taught to assess their own as well as others' writing. Colonial his-
tory in the 1760s and 1770s is taught in social studies in April, alter study 01
early exploration 01 the "new world." My prior experience teaching this unit,
along with the charaeteristics 01 my class (their prior writing experienee, oh-
served library ski lis, attention span, and ability to work together in groupsl.
guided the number and seleetion 01 my objectives. I estimated that the unit
would take lrom IOta 12 days given an instructional period 0145 minutes
three times a week and 90 minutes twice a week. II students caught on quiekly
to the most conceptual aspect 01 the unit, it would likely take , O days. If stu-
dents did not and/ar il they had dilficulty writing their editarials, it likely
would be a 12- to 14-day uhit.
PART 1: OBJECTIVES
My general objective lar this unit is to have students gain knowledge 01 Colonial
America in the 1760s and 1770s, particularly knowledge 01 King George's vari-
ous taxes and the American colonists' reactions to them. More specilic objectives
are needed to darify the meaning of this general objective. I want my students to:
'. remember the speeilies about the Parliamentary Aets (e.g., the Sugar, Stamp,
and Townshend Aets);
171
172 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
2. explain the consequences 01 the Parliamentary Acts lar dilferent colonial
groups;
3. choose a colonial character or group and write a persuasive editorial
stating his¡her/its position on the acts (the editorial must inelude at least
one supporting reason not specilically taught ar covered in the elass); and
4. self and peer edit the editorial.
COMMENTARY
~ther ilian star~g with the four specific unit objectives, Ms. Airasian begins
Wlth an ove~arching obJecnve: to gam knowledge about a particular period in
Amencan hlstory. To provide the focus needed to plan instruction and assess-
ment, she states four more facused objectives.
. "In th~ first specific obj~ctive, the verb is "remember" and the noun phrase
18 speclfics about the Parliamentary Acts." Thus, we c1assify this first objective
as remember factual knowledge.
The essence of the second objeetive is to explain the effect of the acts On
various colonial groups. In Table 5.1 (see back inside cover), explaining means
constructmg a cause-and-effect model and is a cognitive process in the cate-
gory Understand. In terms of knowledge, "consequences for different colonial
groups" most c10sely resembles "theories, models, and structures." Thus, we
classify this second objective as understand conceptual knowledge.
The third objective resembles an activity or assessment task more than an
objective. The verb is "write a persuasive editorial"; the noun is "colonial char-
acter or group." Ifwe assume, however, that Ms. Airasian expects students to
leam to write persuasive editorials on a variety of topies during the year, we
can c1assify this objective. "Write persuasive editorials" suggests Crea te. "Vari-
ety of topies" suggests sorne eombination of Factual and Conceptual knowledge.
Thus, we place this objec\ive in cells A6 (create [based onlfactual knowledge) and
B6 (create [~ased onl conceptual knowledge) of the Taxonomy Table.
A slmllar argument can be made for the fourth objective. The verbs are
"self edit" a~d
"peer editn
; the naun is "the editorial.lI We can proceed in two
ways (assummg Ms. Airasian's intent is for students to learn to edil rather than
simpIY.ei1gage in the editing activity). We can assume that editing, particularly
self-edltmg and peer-editing, is a form of evaluation. Hence, Evaluate is the
process category. The evaluation would be based on SOrne eriteria; henee, we
ha~~ evaluate [based onl conceptual knowledge. Altematively, one might think of
edlling as Applyzng, that is, applying the rules of punetuation and grarnrnar.
!his 18 a ~uent c1assification problem, where a less complex process, Apply,
~ Ulvolved m a more complex one, Evaluate. We solve this problem by arbitrar-
tly c1assifying the objeetive in the more complex of the levels-in this case
Evaluate. '
Still another way of looking at editing is as one step in the process of writing
the editorIal. Then we would be back to the previous objective: create [based on]
Chapter 11 Parliamentary Acts Vignette 173
factual and conceptual knowledge. For the time being, we follow our first instinct
and place this objective in cell BS (evaluate [based onl conceptual knowledge). .
The placement of these objeetives in the cells of the Taxonomy Table lS
shown in Table 11.].
PART 2: INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
Day 1
I considered a number of ways to teach my general objective, induding hav-
ing students write a letter to a relative in England describing the impact of the
Parliamentary Acts on his/her family or having students write petitions against
the taxes. In the end, I decided to have students write a newspaper editorial
from the perspective 01 either a Patriot or a Tory colonial. To obtain editorials
written lrom both a Patriot and Tory perspective, I randomly selected two stu-
dent groups based on the total number of letters in their first and last names.
Odd-numbered students were Patriots (cheers) and even-numbered students
Tories (grumbles). Randomizing student groups provided balanced ability
groups and peer suppart for students who needed il. I then reconvened the en-
tire dass and talked with them about the nature of the unit: a combination of
social studies and persuasive writing requiring a number of steps to complete.
Students were told that the unit would last approximately 10 days. I gave eaeh
student a copy of the checklist I would use when assessing the editorials (At-
tachment A at the end of the chapter). I read each criterion aloud and asked
ihdividual students to explain in their own words what each criterion mean!.
COMMENTARY
Ms. Airasian recognizes that many instruc\ional ac\ivities could form the basis
for the unit, and she seleets one. Her recognition points up the difference be-
tween objectives and instructional aetivities; stated somewhat differently, it
points out the flexibility and creativity teaéhers have in planning, teaching, and
assessing afler they have identified specific objectives.
The phrase "a combinatioI\ of social studies and persuasive writing requir-
ing a number of st¡:ps to complete" suggests Procedural knowledge. Thus, we as-
sume that students are going to apply procedural knowledge as they complete
their primary task, writing the editorial. However, for the time being, none oE
the activilies is related to such an objective. Overall, on the first day Ms.
Airasian provides students with an overview of the unit, including the ex-
pected final product and thecriteria that will be used to evaluate il. Since the
set of eriteria constitute Conceptual knowledge, we classify Day l's activilies as
ultimately related lo understanding conceptual knowledge (because students have
to "explain in their own words what eaeh criterion meant").
11.1
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE lo DIMENSION RI!MEMBER A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
2. 3. UNDERSTAND ApPLY 4. ANALY%.E 5.
EYALUATE
Objective 1
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 2 Objective 4
c.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
D.
META-
COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDGE
Key
ObjOb.ec~ve 1 == Remember specifics about the Parliamentary Acts
Jectlve 2 - Explain th .
Objective 3 :: Choose a c~~~~ ~~~~~:e~f the Parliamenta:r Acts on d~n~ colonial groups.
Objective 4 == SeU and peer edit the e ditori~.group and wnte a persuaslve edltOrial stating his/her/its position.
6.
CREATE
Objective 3 Objective 3
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapter 11 Parliamentary Acts Vignette 175
Day2
I began the seeond day with the social studies unit. I showed a video 01 the
colonial period that deseribed the tax aets and gave a sense of the attitudes 01
the eolonists toward England. I lollowed the video with a class diseussion 01
the various taxes (Iisted on lhe board for students) and the attitudes of different
groups of eolonists toward the taxes. (" How do you think people in the
colonies felt about the taxes? oid everyone leel the same? Why?") For home-
work students read their textbook ehapter on the tax acts.
Instruction on the first two objectives has begun. The video provides informa-
tion on both Ihe tax acts (Objective 1) and Ihe attitudes of the eolonists toward
England (Objective 2). The textbook chapter provides additional information
pertaining to the first two objectives. Wilh respect to knowledge, Ihe emphasis
is primarily on Factual knowledge. Allhough Ms. Airasian introduces different
groups of colonists, the key word is introduce. Thus, we suggest that these ac-
tivities relate primarily to Ihe fust objective, remember factual knawledge.
Day 3
The third day was spent reviewing the homewark. Class diseussion 01 the vari-
ous tax aets, the reasons for them, and their impact on the eolonists oceupied
the whole class periodo Sludents were told to prepare lar a quiz on the various
tax aets the next day. They were lo reread the prior day's ehapter and review
their notes. I told them lhat the quiz would require lhem to match parts of a
tax ael to the name 01 the tax aet.
The continued emphasis on Factual knawledge is evident. Ms. Airasian believes
that Factual knowledge provides ~ "scaffold" for the other objectives. She be-
lieves Ihat without Factual knowledge 01 Ihe tax acts, students will have diffi-
culty explaining Ihe eonsequepces 01 the acts and writing an editorial from a
given colonis!'s point 01 view. The "matching" quiz is consistent wilh our elas-
sification 01 Ihese activities as remembering factual knawledge.
Day4
The lourth day began with a quiz that counted one-lilth 01 the linal unit grade.
Alter the quiz, I slarted a review 01 persuasive writing. I reminded the students
that persuasive writing tries to make the reader agree with the writer's opin-
ion, so the writer must provide faets and examples to baek up the opinion.
176 Section III The Taxonorny in Use
Otherwise the writer would not persuade or eonvinee the reader. Students
were relerred to their writing portfolios to examine their prior persuasive writ-
ing. I emphasized the differenee between opinion (what one believes is true)
and faets (what can be supported by evidence). I told them that an editorial is
a type 01 persuasive writing and showed examples of student editorials from
Scholastic Magazine. I outlined criteria for the editorial: a strong and elear
openmg senlence stating a position; at least three SUpporting reasons for that
posltlon based on laets, not opinions; and a eonvincing ending (Attaehment
A). I also had the Sehool Distric!'s Grade 5 Foeus Correetion Areas (FCAs)
(Attachment B at lhe end of the chapter), but did not lind them suffident
without adding my Own assessment criteria. I reminded students that one of
their reasons had to be original, a reason they identified On their own not
one discussed in elass or in the textbook. '
COMMENTARY
Atte~tion shilis to a review of persuasive writing. Clearly, writing an editorial
reqUlres Proeedural knowledge (i.e., how to write persuasive essays) and Con-
cept~al knowledge (i.e., the criteria used to evaluate a pieee oE persuasive
wnting). Chapter 4 explained lhat eriteria are associated with Procedural knowl-
edge (p. 54). Those criteria, however, are of a particular kind. They are used
to . determme when speeific Procedural knowledge should be put to use.
Cnte.na u~ed to evaluate, as in this instance, are differen!. They tend to be
classlÍJeatlOns and categories (here, for example, "supporting reasons" or
"character-appropriate reasons"). Because they are classifications and eate-
ganes, we. consider them Conceptual knowledge. Because persuasive writing
had been mirad uced and practiced earlier in the school year, Ms. Airasian
chooses to revlew p~rsuasive writing conceptually (e.g., what makes persua-
Slve wntmg persuaslve wnting, examples oE persuasive editorials) and proce-
durally (e.g., three-step sequence). 5he aIso reviews a set oE criteria Eor evalu-
ating writing in general (aIso Conceptual knowledge). The Day 4 activities relate
pnmarily to understand conceptual knowledge and secondarily to apply proeedural
knowledge.
Day5
On the filth day the whole dass brainstormed about speeific taxes and the
colonists' reaetions to them. I wrote their ideas on the board and students took
notes. In preparing students for seleeting a eharaeter whose views the editorial
would represent, the larger Patriol and T ory groups were broken into small
subgroups of three to live to diseuss how the taxes and events affeeted difler-
ent groups in the colonies (e.g., merehants, larmers, bahkers, housewives,
etc.). After 15 minutes 01 small group diseussion, the dass was ealled together
to share the results 01 these diseussions.
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapter 11 Parliamentary Acls Vignette 177
The focus returns to lhe tax acts and lhe colonists' reactions to lhem. During
lhe brainstorming and small group discussions, students are asked to make in-
ferenees. Aeeording to Table 5.1, inferring means drawing a logical eonclusion
from presented data. Inferenees are to be made based on students' Conceptual
knowledge oE Patriots and Tories (i.e., belieEs and altitudes of two different cate-
gories of eolonists) and lheir Factual knowledge of the tax acts. Thus, these aetiv-
ities relate to understand conceptual knowledge and remember factual knowledge.
Days 6and 7
The sixth and seventh days locused on students seleeting a colonial eharaeter
who would "author" lheir editorial and identilying reasons to support that
eharaeter's position in the editorial. I provided sodal studies texts, trade books,
dassroom eneydopedias, and books containing briel biographies 01 colonial
people and descriptions 01 lile in the colonies. The materials presented a range
al reading levels and eontent related lo Ihe effects of the Parliamentary Acts
on diflerent colonial charaeters. I passed out guidelines to help students think
about and identily their eharacter (Attachment Cal the end of the ehapter). B e-
fare idenlifying their character, I required sludents to read at least two short bi-
ographies al colonists representing their Patriot or Tory designation.
Here students select the eharacter or group lo "author" lheir editorials. This ac-
tivity is c1early related lo Objective 3. 5tudents are given sorne latitude in se-
lecting their eharacters or groups, but theymust provide speeific information
about their ehoice. Attachment e provides criteria to guide students in making
lheir choices-hence, Conceptual knowledge. Implicit in lhe seJection of a eharac-
ter, however, is analyzing prior information in Ihe unit as well as the readings
for Days 6 and 7. In particular, to make lheir selection and respond to Attach-
men! C, students mus! differentia!e (lha! is, distinguish relevant from irrele-
vant or importan! from unimportant parts--see Table 5.1). Differentiate is a cog-
nitive process in the category Analyze. Thus, these activities relate to understand
conceptual knowledge and analyze [based on] conceptual knowledge, respectively.
At the end al the sevenlh day, students were required to submit a written
description 01 their charaeter, why they ehose that eharaeter, what position
he/she would take in the editorial, and one reason that supported that posi-
tion. I read eaeh studenl's description and made suggeslions, usually about the
appropriateness 01 his/her choice or the quality 01 his/her novel reason. I pro-
vided suggestions lar the lew students who had diffieulty choosing a eharaeter.
178 Section III The Taxonorny in Use
COMMENTARY
Ms. Airasian is making a formative assessment of student learning, presum-
ably to check students' status and completeness before allowing them to begin
their editorials. Some students had difficu!ty finding a novel reason to support
their character's or group's position. Coming up with a new example of an ele-
ment within a category is exemplifying, a process in the category Understand (see
Table 5.1). Thus, the students' task is classified as understand conceptual knowI-
edge (with Patriots and Tories representing two categories).
Days8-10
On the succeeding three days, students worked individually on their Own edi-
torials, starting with an outline and using the evaluation form (Attaehment Al
for guidanee. During the writing, J moved around the room answering stu-
dents' questions, helping them identify issues for fue ir draft, guiding a few stu-
dents in beginning their writing, asking questions to focus students on needed
historieal information, and listening to students' thoughts and problems. J often
prompted students to help them solidify the sense of their eharaeter. For exam-
pie, if the eharaeter was a printer, J might ask, "What taxes were most impor-
tanl to Ihe charaeter and how did they affect him or her?" J also referred slu-
dents to the guidelines for identifying a colonial eharacter (Attaehment Cl.
Some students were able lo begin wriling Iheir draft almost immedialely, while
ofuers needed more discussion.
COMMENTARY
During these three days students are expected to produce their editorials. Sinee
produce is a cognitive proeess in the category Create, we classify this activity as
create [based onlJactuaI kn01JJledge (i.e., specific knowledge about the colonists
and the Parliamentary Aets) and conceptual knowledge (i.e., knowledge about
Patriots vs. Tories; knowledge oí the evaluation eriteria).
At this time, objectives, instructional activities, and assessments are inter-
acting simultaneously in the classroom. Although the main emphasis is on Ob-
jective 3, writing a persuasive editorial, Ms. Airasian spends most oí her time
helping students with Objeetives 1 and 2. Mastery of these objectives pro vides
the "raw material" for the editorials. Unfortunately, Ms. Airasian finds that
Sorne students stilI have questions about their character or group or have not
even selected a charaeter or group.
As expected, the time needed to complete a fi rst draft varied considerably
among the students. Some writers eompleted a first draft in one elass period,
while others needed all three periods. When several students completed ¡heir
drafts, J stopped the elass and did a mini-review of the evaluation eheeklist
11.2 ANALYSIS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ACTS VIGNETTE
IN TERMS OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON
INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE L DIMENSION REMEMBER 2_ UNDERSTAND 3_ APPLY 4. ANALYZJ!: 5.
EVALUATE
6.
CREATE
A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 1
Days 2,3,5
activities
Objective 3
DaysB-l0 activities
B_
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 2 Days.l, ~-7
actlvltles Days6-7 activities Objective 4
Objective 3
DaysB-l0
activities
DaysB-l0 activities
c_
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
Day4 activities
D.
META-
COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDOE
~~ective 1 = Remember specifics about the Parliamentary Acts.. .
~ . 2 = E lain the consequences of fue Parliamentary Acts on different co~omal ~u~. . ..
g~~~: 3 = ~ose a colonial character or group and write a persuasive editorialstating his/her/lts poslt1on.
Ob~ective 4 = Self and peer edit the editorial.
179
180 Section ID The Taxonomy in Use
(Attachment A), since it would guide both sell and peer review 01 the drafts.
First, each student reviewed his or her draft using !he checklist. After!he sell
review, the sludent's parlner also reviewed the draft using the checklist. (In this
elassroom students served as reviewing partners on a regular basis.) After iden-
tilied corrections and/or additions were discussed between the partner and the
author, lhe necessary changes were made as part 01 a second draft. Next, the
student scheduled a private conference with me to review the second draft.
Each student brought his or her redrafted editorial and the checklist completed
by the sludent and partner. Each student read the second draft to me while I
made notes about the content, writing style, and mechanics. Suggestions re-
lated to slyle, appropriateness of supporting inlormation, and historical accu-
racy were provided. My written checklist notes, my oral comments, and!he
student's and partner's reviews guided !he independent writing 01 the linal
draft. In general, writing the final draft took one elass periodo During this stage
oi writing I continued lo hold conierences with students, mainly aiding those
stiJl working on an early dralt. I he Id another mini-review lor the last group 01
writers when their dralts were linished to review the checklist andlor revision
and lor grading.
COMMENTARY
When a group of students complete their first draft of the editorial, Ms.
Airasian prepares them for the fourth objective, self and peer editing of the
draft editorial. Because students rely on the evaluation ehecklist (Attachment
A) as they edit the editorials, the emphasis in the review appears to be on Eval-
uating the editorial based on the Conceptual knowledge included in Attachment
A. As we mentioned earHer, editing also can be viewed as Procedural knowledge.
A major distinetion between the two is whether students use the eriteria "on
their own" (Conceptual knowledge) or follow a series of steps in eonducting the
review, with at least sorne of !he steps eontaining the criteria (Procedural knowl-
edge). Although Attaehment A is a eheeklist, there is no evidenee !hat students
must follow the ehecklist in a specified order (nor are they taught to do so).
Thus, our classifieation of the aetivity as evaluating [based on) conceptual knowl-
edge seerns reasonable.
The third formative assessment 01 the editorials (self and peer review be-
ing the first two) is performed by Ms. Airasian. The use of!he same evaluation
eriteria inereases the likelihood of eonsisteney aeross these three sourees of
feedback.
Our analysis of the instructional activities in terrns of lhe Taxonomy Table
is shown in Table 11.2.
PART 3: ASSESSMENT
I assessed my students during and at the end 01 the unit. Much oi my assess-
ment was inlormal and individual, nOling student questions, requests lor help,
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapler 11 Parliamentary Acts Vigoetle 181
and response to my questions. I used these assessments mainly to help individ-
uals or groups oi students to be sure everyone was elear on the area oi con-
cerno I also used assessments that were individual and somewhat more formal,
for example, my conlerences with individual students to discuss the second
draft 01 their editorial. The answers and suggestions students received Irom
these two lorms 01 individual assessment helped them to understand and im-
prove their editorials. I did not grade students on !hese "helping" assessments,
although it was elear from the conlerences that there was a range in depth 01
understanding among the students.
AII tbis assessment is formative. prom lhe closing sentenee, Ms. Airasian's em-
phasis seerns to be on Understanding. However, we are not certain what type of
knowledge is involved. Most likely,lhe conunents rnade by Ms. Airasian focus
on Conceptual knowledge (e.g., the evaluation criteria) as well as Factual knowl-
edge (e.g., lhe speeific historical details included in lhe editorial).
My quiz on the tax acts and the linal grades I assigneq to students' com-
pleted editorials constituted the more lormal, group-based assessments. For
grading purposes, I reviewed students' lirst draft, the sell and peer reviews, the
second dralt, and the final product. I was inlerested in both the process 01 cre-
ating an editorial and the quality 01 the finished producto I think it is important
lor students to ioJlow the various steps so they recognize that a number 01 ac-
tivities and products are required to produce the linished editorial. Two-lifths
01 the final grades were aJlocated to whether students eompleted the drafts,
peer and sell reviews, redrafts, and a final draft 01 the editorial, that is, whether
they completed the entire process. Most students did complete the process.
Two-fifths 01 the linal grade was based on the quality of the unit's product, the
fin al editorial (see Attachment A). I reviewed what students presented, com-
pared it lo the checkl ist, assigned a grade, and wrole a note to each student
explaining the basis lor the grade (Attach. ment D at the end of the chapter).
The quiz accounted lor the final lifth 01 the grade.
The quiz focuses on the specifics of the various tax acts and, hence, relates to
remember factual knowledge. In grading lhe editorial, Ms. Airasian is eoneemed
wilh bolh lhe process (i.e., apply procedural knuwledge) and lhe product (i.e., cre-
ating [based on] factual and conceptual knowledge). She expects all students to
lollow a nine-step procedure: (1) seleet a charaeter, (2) read about lhe character,
(3) prepare an outline, (4) write a draft, (5) self and peer review lhe draft, (6) re-
vise lhe draft, (7) submit lhe editorial to Ms. Airasian, (8) receive feedback, and
(9) possibly revise again. This is lhe procedure Ms. Airasian wants studenls to
follow not muy on this project but on future projects as well. The editing
182 Section ID The Taxonomy in Use
procesS involves Evaluating!he editorial based on the criteria (Conceptual Icnowl-
edge) in Attachment A.
I was generally pleased with the editorials my students produced. They
completed them in a reasonable time, except for two students who needed
extra time. I judged that students had done very well in identifying and using
historieal faets. They also did well in identifying and selecting supporting
reasons to justify lhe position adopted in their editorials. For lhe most part,
students' supporting reasons were accurate and appropriate to thei r chosen
charaeter. They followed the procedures required. However, it was also quite
e/ear that many students had substantial difficulty inferring a supporting rea-
son that was not taught in e/ass or found in the tex!. This difficully was evi-
dent in both the draft and completed editorials. Next time I teach this unil I
would put more instructional emphasis on higher-Ievel processes like inter-
preting and inferring.
COMMENTARY
Our analysis of the assessments in terms of !he Taxonomy Table is presented in
Table 11.3.
PART 4: CLOSING COMMENTARY
In this section we examine !he vignette in terms of Our four basic questions: !he
learning question, !he instruction question, the assessment question, and the
a1ignment question.
THE LEARNING QUESTION
Thls instructional unit has a dual focus. The first js on the Parliamentary Acts
as seen through the eyes of various American colonists. The second is on
persuasive writing. The first two objectives pertain to the first focus; !he last
two objectives are concerned with both foci. We can see!he dual focus of the
last two objectives most clearly by examining the criteria used to evaluate
the editorial (Attachment A). The firs! !wo "content" criteria have to do wilh
persuasive writing (i.e., stating a point of view and supporting lhat point
of view). The last three "content" criteria have to do with the Parliamentary
Acts (i.e., appropriate reasons, historically accurate reasons, and can tell
whelher character is a Patriot or a Tory). The remaining "content" criterion is a
requirement lhat Understanding in addition to Remembering is displayed in the
editorial.
11.3 ANALYSIS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ACTS VIGNETTE IN
TERMS OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON ASSESSMENTS
THE C:OGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIM ENSION A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
l. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
REMEMBER ~U~N'..'D~E:'R~5~T~A~N'..'D~_..'.A~P~P~L~Y~_-I--...'.:A~N~A~L!y::.:r;~E,-+-...:E::y.:.::::AL:::U:.:A:.T:.:E::..-V .... C ... R ;.: E::.:A
T "'
_
_
E ,
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Days6,7
activities ObJectiVe 4
08158-10
activities
c:.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
Day4
activities
D.
META"
COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDGE
~ . A~
Objective 1 = Remember specifics about the Parliamentary C\D.. .
Objective 2 = Explain the consequences of the Parliamentary Acts on ~eren~ c o~orual ~ou~s. . ..
Objective 3 = Choose a colonial character or group and write a persuaslve editonal stating hlS/her/lts posrtion.
Objeclive 4 ~ Self and peer edil \he editoriaL . .
Assessment A = Oassroom questions and observabonsj informal assessments.
Assessment B = Quiz
Assessment e = Editorial (with ten evaluation criteria-Attachment A). . . Dark shading indicates fue strongest alignment-an objective, an inslructional actiVlty, and an assessment are all present m cell. Lighter shading indicates two of the three are present.
. th
e same
183
184 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
THE INSTRUCTION QUESTION
The dual focus of this UlÚt results in an interesting pattem of inslructional ac-
tivities. After a general orientation day, Ihe next two days were spent on the
ParHamentary Acts and the colonísts; then Ihe focus shifted to persuasive writ-
ing for a day. During the following two days, Ihe focus was back on Ihe ParHa-
mentary Acts and the colonísts. In the final three days, Ihe focus returned to
persuasive writing. The instructional activities addressed all six of the process
categories (see Table 11.2). In Ihe first week, the activities emphasized Remem-
ber, Understand, and Apply. During Ihe second week, Ihe activities moved from
Analyze to Evaluate and Create.
THE ASSESSMENT QUESTION
Ms. Airasian used three different assessments for three different purposes.
Classroom questions and observations were used to check students' under-
standing conceptual knowledge. Do students understand Ihe differences between
Patriots and Tories? Do Ihey understand the criteria that will be used to evalu-
ate Iheir editorials? The quiz focused exc1usively on remembering factual knrn»l-
edge. Do students know Ihe details of Ihe various Parliamentary Acts? Both of
Ihese are c1assified as formative assessments. The summative assessment was
the editorial. As mentioned earHer, the editorial assessed in part creating based
on factual and conceptual knowledge.
THE ALlGNMENT QUESTION
Strong alignment is evident in cells Al (Remember Factual knowledge), B2 (Un-
derstand Conceptual knowledge), and a combined A6/B6 (Create [based on] Fac-
tual knowledge and Conceptual knowledge). Each of these cells contains an objec-
tive, several days of activities, and sorne sort of assessmen!. We find minor
indicators of misalignment cells A2 (Understand Factual know/edge), B4 (Analyze
[based on] Conceptual knowledge), BS (Evaluate [based on] Conceptual Knowledge),
and C3 (Apply Procedural knowledge). One of Ihese cells is worlhy of comment.
The Proc~du ral knrn»ledge in cell C3 (App/y Procedural kn=/edge) is a "meta" pro-
eedure that applies to all writing: get information, prepare an outline, write a
draft, review Ihe draft and have a peer review Ihe draft, revise Ihe draft, sub-
mit the draft to Ihe teacher, and prepare a final draft. Because Ihis procedure
had been emphasized throughout Ihe school year, it was reviewed only briefly
in this UlÚt, wilh no objective stated and no assessment made.
PART 5: CLOSING qUESTIONS
As wilh the analysis of a11 our vignettes, we were left wilh a few unanswered
questions. We raise two of Ihe most important in this c10sing section.
1. What are Ihe advanlages and disadvantages of inlegrated (or cross-
disciplinary) inslructional units? This is a very nice example of an in-
r
ehapter 11 Parliamentary Acts Vignette 185
structional UlÚt linking history wilh language arts. This approach offers
sorne advantages. For example, persuasive writing can make hlstory
"come to life"; students must pul Ihemselves in Ihe place of histoncal
characters in order to wrile Ihe editorial. Similarly, integraled urols help
sludenls see !hal real-world problems frequently require knowledge and
skills from multiple academic disciplines or subjecl areas. .
Al Ihe same time, however, this unít illustrales potential problerns m
designing and delivering such units. How should teachers sequence activ-
ities related to Ihe dual focus of such uníts? How should teachers seore
and grade assessments that require integration of Ihe two disciplines?
How can teachers best deal wilh Ihe individual differences among stu-
denls on bolh dimensions: historical facts and concepts, and persuasive
writing concepls and procedures? To fully understand Ihe lasl question,
consider Ihat integrated uníts contain two sets of Factual knowledge, two
seis of Conceptual knowledge, and two seis of Procedural knrn»ledge. Fina11y ,
what role do cognitive process categories play in fully inlegrating croSS-
disciplinary units? Answers to Ihese questions w~ g.o ~ long w~y loward
designing "workable" interdisciplinary or cross-disclpIinary uruls.
2. What are Ihe danger. of using generic raUng scales or scoring rubrics in
assessment? Ms. Airasian was expected to use a district-adopted set of Fo-
cus Correction Areas (FCAs) lo evaluale her students' writing of persua-
sive editorials. In addition, she included four generic writing criteria on
her own evaluation formo The result was four sets of crileria on Ihe evalua-
tion formo (1) criteria pertaining lo persuasive writing, (2) criteria perlain-
ing to ensuring understanding ralher !han remembering, (~) .criteria p.e;-
laining lo Ihe contenl of Ihe editorial, and (~) criteria p~rtamu:g to wntmg
in general. How are Ihese four sets of entena lo be we.!ght~ m. delerrnm-
ing Ihe quality of Ihe editorial? How much value do genenc w.ntmg cnte-
ria have in evaluating Ihe quality of Ihe editorial? These questlOns (and
olhers) are worth addressing when multiple evaluation criteria are used
wilh writing assignments.
ATTACHMENT A EVALUATION FORM: COLONIAL EDITORIAL
ATTACHMENT B GRADE 5 Focus CORRECTION AREAS
(FCAS)
Name _______________ Date _____ _
Read the editorial and decide il Ihe (onten! and writing (onventions are mel
Pul a check mark lar Ves and leave a blank lar No.
Aulhor Partner Teaeher
Content
1. lhe author states a clear point of view
at the beginning 01 the editorial.
2. The author has at least three reasons
lo support the (haraeter's point 01 view.
3. The authar indudes ane reason Ihat is not
Irom !he textbook or dass discussian.
4. The reasans given are appropriate to Ihe charaeler.
5. The reasons given are histori(ally a«urate.
6. The reader (an tell whelher Ihe chara(ter writing
is a Patriot or a Tory.
Writing Conventlons
7. The author writes in complete sentences.
8. The author punetuates (orredly.
9. The author uses corred spolling.
10. The authar writes legibly.
1. Use complete sentences (no sentence fragments or run-on sentences).
2. Wri!e proper paragraphs.
a. Indent Ihe first line.
b. Write a tapie sentence.
<. Wrile supporting details.
d. Write al! sentences on the same tapie.
e. Write a concluding sentence.
3. Use (orred spelling.
4. Write legibly.
186
187
ATTACHMENT C IDENTIFYING A COLONIAL CHARACTER
ATTACHMENT D STUDENT GRADING SAMPLES
Here are some questions that can help you i dentify a eharacter lar your editorial:
Are you aman or a woman, a boy or a girl?
JQhn, your editorial was exeellenl. The writing was dear Ihroughoul. I understood exactly why
Thomas Goodson, the Boston banker, was a supporter 01 King Georg. and the Parliamentary aetions.
You have earelully explained the position 01 Mr. Goodson and his ties to his lamily in London. This
writing shows significant improvement ayer your last editorial. Keep up the good work.
In whieh 01 Ihe colonies do you tive? Do you live in a city, in a small town, or on a larml
1 read your editorial, Karen, and knew very ctearly why Abigail Jones was a supporter 01 the Patri-
ots. This Cambridge widow eertainly had her reasaos to leel the adions 01 King George were un-
jusi. You have explained why her husband grew so despondent alter Ihe establishment 01 Ihe
Stamp Aet impacted so harshly on his printing bus i nes~ Be sure to proal your writing earelully to
avoid run-on sentences. This is an area in which you can improve.
How many people are in your lamily?
How long has your lamily been in Ihe colony?
Does your lamily have a trade or o((upation?
Ben, 1 stHI do not understand your reasoning in this editorial. Andrew Dennis, as a Charleston land-
owner and cousin 01 Ihe Duke 01 Lancaster, had many reasons to support Ihe position 01 Ihe Eng-
lish government He shipped rice Irom his low country plantation to Europe lar sale. He main-
tained dose ties wilh his lamily in England and secured many loans from Ihe lamily bank. Even
when you have mentioned all 01 Ihis, you have made him a Patriot and not supported his position
with reasons. We discussed Ihis during our conlerence. It appears to me Ihat your linal copy is ba-
sically the same as Ihe rough dralt w. examined. It is important that you make necessary ehanges
on the linal copy. Also, Ben, the writing mechanics have not been polished. There are still many
spelling errors, as well as sentenee Iragments. Please meet with me again to discuss how Ihis edi-
torial can be improved.
Do you have any ties to England, sueh as a rousin, grandparent brolher. or aunt?
How important are the things that the Parliament taxes (sugar, stamps, tea, glass, paper) lor you or
your lamily?
188
189
CHAPTER 12
Volcanoes? Here? Vignette
This vignette describes a unit on volcanoes that was taught lo a seventh-grade
science class in a large school dislricl in Pennsylvania by Mr. Duane Parker.
(The vignette was written by Dr. Michael SlIÚth.)
This class, comprised 01 15 boys and 12 girls, met live times per week lor
45-minute periods. In terms 01 their science achievement, I would rate 4 01 the
students as "high achievers," 11 as "Iow achievers," and the remaining 12 stu-
dents as "average achievers."
I planned the unit to last eight days. It actually lasted twice as long (16
class sessions)-almost a month 01 the school year.
PART 1: OSJECTIVES
The unit was designed to promote conceptual restructuring and meaninglul
learning in earth science. It was based on the dominant research paradigm in
geology, the theory 01 plate tectonics. In contrast to the memorization 01 inlor-
mation about volcanoes, the emphasis was on "reasoned argument" which in-
tegrated evidence with theory. The major goal 01 the unit was lor the students
to '/get smarter about volcanoes."
COMMENTARY
In lhe vocabulary of the Taxonomy Table, "conceptual restructuring" probably
is similar in meaning to understand conceptual knowledge. More specifically, the
Conceptual knowledge the studenls encounler in lhe unil is intended lo "shape"
or "modify" the conceptual framework lhal students bring lo the unit. As used
in Chapler 5, lhe phrase "meaningfullearning" caplures all of the cognitive
process calegories beyond Remember. Finally, unlike lhe objectives lhal follow,
the staled goal ("gel smarter aboul volcanoes") is exlremely vague (as is true
of mosl goals--see Chapler 2).
190
Chapler 12 Volcanoes? Here? Vignette 191
More specilically, the students were to achieve lour objectives:
,. understand the theory 01 plate tectonics as an explanation lar volcanoes;
2. examine and interpret a set 01 data on the geology 01 the local region (geo-
logic maps, oil well drill records, and rock samples);
3. compare the geology 01 the local region to places that have volcanoes, such
as the states 01 Hawaii and Washington; and
4. taking into account the learning rellected in Objectives , through 3, write a
letter to the County Commissioner that is responsive to his request (see At-
tachment A at the end 01 the chapter).
COMMENTARY
This set of objectives is inleresting. The verbs in the fusl three objectives ("un-
dersland," "inlerprel," and "compare") are all associated with lhe cognitive
process calegory Understand (see Table 5.1 inside the back cover). The noun
phrases ("theory of plale teclonics," "geology of lhe local regions," "places thal
have volcanoes") are more difficull to classify. "Theory" is clearly relaled lo
Conceptual knowledge (see Table 4.1 inside the fronl cover). The focus on Concep-
tual knowledge in lhe first objective is also supporled by the phrase "as an ex-
planation of volcanoes." Explaining requires the conslruction of a causal model
(see Table 5.1). Thus, we classify the fusl three objectives as understand concep-
tual knowledge.
The fourth objective is a culminating activity, not an objective, so it will nol
be classified. However, in the third section on assessment we classify lhe com-
ponents of the scoring rubrico
In surnmary, then, we place the Jirsl three objectives in a single cell of lhe
Taxonomy Table, B2 (understand conceptual knowledge). Table 12.1. shows lhe
placement.
PART 2: INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
Dayl
I began the unit by presenting the students with a letter lrom County Commis-
sioner Fred Luckino that posed a problem lor them to considero The letter (At-
tachment A) asked whether it would be prudent to develop, at considerable
cost, a plan for evacuating the county in case a volcanic eruption occurred in
the region. The Commissioner was asking lor their help in making this deci-
sion. I told the students they were to submit a written recommendation based
on scientilic thinking and evidence by the end 01 the uni!. I reminded them
that three general criteria, emphasized throughout the course, were to be used
in this regard: clarity, relationships among parts, and consistency with evi-
dence. I told them they were required lo prepare a portfolio ollacts, analyses,
lindings, and authoritalive statements to support their recommendation.
FF
12.1 ANALYSIS OF THE VOLCANOES VIGNETTE IN
TERMS OF THE. TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON
STATED OB.JECTIYES
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION 1. REMEMBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLY 4.
ANALYZE
5.
EVALUATE
A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE Objective 1;
Objective 2;
Objective 3
c.
PROCEOURAL
KNOWLEDGE
D.
META·
COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDGE
Key
Objective 1 = Understand the thcory of pIate tectonics as an explanation for volcanoes.
Objective 2 = Examine and interpret a set of data on the geology of the local region.
Objective 3 = Compare the geology of the local region to pIares tilat have volcanoes.
6.
CREATE
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapler 12 Volcanoes? Here? Vignette 193
Furthermore, their reeommendation should be based on the likelihood that Ihe
region would experienee a volcanie eruplion in Ihe next several deeades. Th is
inlroduetion took the better part of the first day.
In comhination, lhe three criteria provide a framework to he used by students
lhraughout the uni!. The framework provides the link hetween the Conunis-
sioner' s le!ter and lhe data examined during lhe uní!. Because this is a general
introduction lO lhe unít, we do not ciassify it in lhe Taxonomy Table.
Day2
On the second day, the students were asked to respond to two queslions: (1)
What am I being hired to do? and (2) What do I need to know? I asked Ihe stu·
dents lo read silently through the letter and underline unlamiliar words and
phrases. When a studen! asked, "Why are we talking aboul voleanoes when
we don't have any here?" I responded by distributing a newspaper article
dated February 1, 1986, reporting On volcanic aetivity in a nearby metropoli-
tan area.
The two questions require lhat students analyze the information in lhe letler.
Within the process category Analyze, the emphasis here is on differentiating-
!hat is, clistinguishing relevant fram irrelevant or important from unimportant
parts (see Tahle 5.1). We consider knowledge of lhe details presented in lhe let-
ter to he Factual knowledge. Thus, we place lhis activity in cell A4, Analyze Fac-
tual knowledge.
Days 3, 4
The lessons on Days 3 and 4 were designed lO determine students' current
eoneeptions about how volcanoes "work." I asked them to draw what a vol-
cano looks like above and below the ground and to explain why volcanoes
erupt. After students had been engaged in their work for sorne time, I inter-
rupted their efforts lo set the stage for the nexl assignment-the creation of a
class word bank relevant lo a di seussion 01 voleanoes. Students were asked to
nominale words lor inclusion in the word bank. As the class on Day 3 ended, I
asked students to read aboul volcanoes in selected relerenees and to come to
class ready lo diseuss the material they read.
On Day 4, Ihe students developed a 32-ilem word bank. The students
then resumed work on the drawing task lhal had been suspended overnight.
I urged them to use the word bank voeabulary to label elements of their
194 Section lIT The Taxonorny in Use
drawings. They also were to identify needed additions to the word bank. I re-
viewed with them how the three criteria-darity, relationships among the
parts 01 the volcano, and consistency with the evidence--were to be applied
to their drawings.
I instructed the students to write an explanation 01 how a volcano works
to go along with their drawings and to complete the task without looking at
each others' papers. I wanted to know what each student knew about volca-
noes. Their work revealed a diversity 01 conceptions about underground struc-
ture and the causes 01 volcanic eruption.
COMMENTARY
In terms of cognitive processes, the emphasis is on explaining (Understand). Ex-
plaining requires constructing a cause-and-effect model of a system-in this
case, a system that produces a volcanic eruption. The model itself is Conceptual
knowledge (see Table 4.1). Therefore, we classify the drawing and writing activ-
ity as understand conceptual knowledge.
To talk about their models, the students need a vocabulary. In the Taxon-
omy Table, vocabulary is the same as knowledge of terminology. Thus, the em-
phasis here is on Factual knowledge (see Table 4.1). Since the terminology is to
be used with the drawings, we see this activity as understanding factual knowl-
edge. The word bank serves as a memory aid; thus, recalling is downplayed and
the emphasis shlfts to recognize.
Thls activity is a nice illustration of the difference between knowledge of
terminology (Factual knowledge) and knowledge of categories the terminology
represents (Conceptual knowledge). For example, "magma" is a term for "vol-
canic rock." Placing the label "magma" on their drawings enables students to
talk about their drawings. Without proper labels, students would be forced to
point to various aspects of the drawing and make references to "this" and
uthat.u
In many ways, the activity on Days 3 and 4 serves as a pre-assessment. The
teacher is interested in knowing what students understand about the causes of
volcanic eruptions before instruction really begins. Since each picture invites
numerous explanations, a written explanation is needed to get at student un-
derstandíng. Thus, we are dealing with two related cells of the Taxonomy
Table: understand conceptual knowledge and remember factual knowledge.
Day5
The entire class session on the lifth ¡Jay consisted 01 a class discussion about
students' conceptions 01 the causes 01 volcanic eruptions. Having carelully ex-
amined the student work, I selected five diverse, high-quality pieces lor stu-
dents to present and "delend" to their classmates. I handed out photocopies 01
the selected work and told students that the goal 01 the discussion was to con-
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapter 12 Volcanoes? Here? Vignette 195
sider all possible explanations 01 what makes volcanoes erupt. The discussion
turned out to be incredibly challenging to directo Even with carelul planning,
the scene was full 01 improvisation, both on my par! and on the par! of the
students.
In the midst 01 the debate I reminded students that consensus about why
volcanoes erupt was not the goal 01 the conversation. Rather, the goal was to
explore the diversity 01 drawings and ideas to lind out why students under-
stand what they do. The real battles would have to be lought with evidence
and arguments; these would have to wait.
At this point, Mr. Parker recognizes the diversity of individual student know-
ing, rather than shared knowledge. Although this is consistent with hls empha-
sis ("all possible explanations of what makes volcanoes erupt"), it is not con-
sistent with his intent as expressed in the first objective (i.e., explanations
consistent with the theory of plate tectonics). Eventually, the shift to a common
understanding will be made based on "evidence and arguments." Thus,
although all the activities on Day 5 are tangentially related to the first objec-
tive, understand conceptual knowledge, the first objective remains (purposely)
unattained.
Day6
On the sixth day, students began their work on the major task at hand: the ex-
amination 01 the geological evidence lor volcanoes in their county. I began by
asking questions such as "What kinds ofrocks are volcanic?" "What do they
look like?" "Do we have any old magma around here?" Students worked on
this task lor the next six days.
The emphasis now shifts to the second objective. The focus is on classifying
rocks (understanding conceptual knowledge).
I introduced a geologic map that could be used to search lor evidence 01
volcanism. Holding up the map, I directed students' attention to the variety 01
colors (a diflerent color lor each type 01 rock), acquainted them with the scale
01 the map, and described how the map key relates the colors to the rock
names. I also told them how the map relates to the videotape on local geology
I was about to show them. Next, I led the class through a page-by-page
overview 01 thei r Research Materials Packet, a 20-page text containing back-
ground inlormation and newspaper clippings about earthquakes.
j
,
I
I
196 Section nI The Taxonomy in Use
COMMENTARY
These activities are intended lo provide sludenls with an accumulation of Fac-
tual knuwledge. Cognitively, the focus seems lo be on rememberíng factual knuwl-
edge. Eventually, studenls may have to seJect the relevanl knowledge (Analyze),
bul we have lo wail and see.
I then talked to them about the theory of plate tectonics, using three-
dimensional models and a filmstrip to convey its major elements. I asked
questions throughout the presentation, honing in on the utility of the infor-
mation for the overall task.
COMMENTARY
Knowledge of theories and models is Conceptual knowledge (see Table 4.1).
Eventually, Mr. Parker intends for studenls to use this theory and these models
to explain whal happens when vo1canoes erupt. Thus, the implicil objective
once again takes the fonn understand conceptual knuwledge.
Finally, I played a 15-minute videotape on earthquakes and geological
work. The first part 01 the video contained lootage Irom recent earthquakes
and a seismogram Irom a local museum. The second part showed a local
geologist on a rack exposure in the northern part 01 the county. The geolo-
gist described how geologists collect and lag rack samples. He also dis-
cussed how geologic maps are used to determine the age 01 racks and
conduded by telling the students that the racks he has collected are the
ones they will be examining in elass. I pravided a running commentary
during lhe videotape, inlorming students of important leatures related to
Iheir task (e.g., the examinalion 01 evidenee, lhe use 01 maps, lhe daling 01
racks).
COMMENTARY
The fust parl of the videotape conlains a great deal of Factual knowledge. Ralher
Ihan having sludenls remember this knowledge, however, the purpose seems
lo be motivational (i.e., lo "Iegitimize" Ihe lask Ihe sludents are facing). The
second parl of the videolape shifts lo Procedural knowledge (e.g., how lO collect
and log rack samples, how lO deleImine the age of racks). Eventually, Ihe
students will be expected lO Apply al leasl sorne of this as Procedural knowl-
edge; however, the primary focus al lhis point seems lo be remember procedural
knowledge.
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapter 12 Volcanoes? Here? Vignette 197
Day 7
On the seventh day, I led a more exlensive discussion 01 Ihe slale geologic
map, leaching sludents how lO use Ihe map, and making sure Ihey knew Ihal
igneous racks are critical evidence lar volcanism. I Ihen sel Ihem lo work in
graups on a lask Ihal look Ihe remainder 01 the seventh day and mosl 01 Ihe
eighlh. The task was lo complele a dala lable aecording lo rack type (e.g., ig-
neous, sedimentary, and metamorphic), lisling every kind 01 roek thal appears
in the state.
The focus shifts lo apply procedural knowledge (i.e., how lo use the map) as well
as remember factual knowledge (e.g., igneous racks are critical evidence for
volcanism). The lask, when compleled, produces a written classification sys-
tem of racks. Thus, we move back to understanding (e.g., c1assifying) conceptual
knowledge.
Afler Ihe students compleled Ihis graup task, Ihey were to answer lour
questions:
1. Whal are Ihe major rack types lound in our county?
2. Whal kinds of igneous rocks are in the county (inlrusive or extrusive)1
3. Aecording to the geologic map, how far from our cily are the dosesl igneous
rocks? How old are they/
4. What eondusions can you draw Irom Ihe data in terms 01 Ihe possibilily 01
volcanic activity in our county?
These questions tap a variety of types of knowledge and cognitive precess cal-
egories. The firsl requires remembering (Le., recalling) factual knuwledge, the sec-
ond understanding conceptual knowledge, and the third applying procedural knowl-
edge (i.e., how lo delermine dislances on maps using their seales). The fourth
question requires studenls lO make inferences_ Inferring lies in the calegory Un-
derstand (see Table 5.1). These inferences are lo be based on sludenls' knowl-
edge of Ihe dala (i.e., Factual knowledge)-hence, understand factual knawledge.
Day8
On Ihe eighth day, I led an "assessmenl conversalion." I seleeled a volunleer
fram each graup lo come lo the board lo write Ihe graup's responses lo one of
the four questions. When eaeh had done so, I asked Ihe dass lo eilher eonlirm
or challenge the responses. Whereas Ihe responses to Ihe first two queslions
\98 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
were conlirmed with little argument, the responses to question 3 created con-
traversy. To answer this question, students had to measure the distance be-
tween their county and the closest igneous racks. The graups came up wlth
quite different answers, ranging fram 120 to 250 miles. In a move to save
time I measured the distance on an overhead transparency of the map and ar-
rived at an answer 01 150 miles lor intrusive igneous racks that are 570 million
years old.
COMMENTARY
Based on this "assessment conversation," Mr. Parker learns that Ihe students
are able to mnember Ihe relevant factual knowledge (question 1) and Ihey ullder-
stand the important conceptual knowledge (question 2). The prablem resides in
applying procedural knowledge (question 3).
At this point I was ready to elicit students' responses to the lourth ques-
tion. There was quick consensus that volcanic activity in the county was
highly unlikely. Nevertheless, they agreed with me that it could not be con-
clusively ruled out. I then praceeded to intraduce students to the next task:
comparing racks colleeted in their region 01 the country with rocks collected
at Mt. St. Helens.
COMMENTARY
After addressing Ihe problem wilh applying procedural knowledge: studenJs are
able to make a proper inference about the likelihood of a volcamc erupllon ID
their cornmunity (evidenee Ihat they understand conceptual knowledge).
I distributed ten raek samples to graups 01 students, five fram a volcanic
region and live collected locally. Students were asked to match the rock sam-
pies to descriptions of different types 01 rocks. Students completed thlS task
within 15 minutes, but as I circulated around the room, I notlced that many
had conlused pum ice with sandstone, a critical misinterpretation since pumiee
is volcanic rack and is not lound in their county. As a result I decided to lead a
brief 'Iassessment conversationll to attain consensus about the identities of the
samples and what these "Iindings" indicated about the local geology.
COMMENTARY
This activity involves classifying--hence, Understand (see Table 5.1). The classi-
fying involves rack samples and rock "types" (i.e., categories). Types, classlfl-
cations, and categories aH suggest Conceptual knowledge (see Table 4.1).
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapler 12 Volcanoes? Here? Vignette \99
Days 9-12
The next lour days presented my students and me with the greatest challenge.
Students were required to search for evidence 01 volcanic rocks on the geo-
logic maps 01 live states surrounding their state, transler igneous rack locations
to a base map 01 the six-state region, measure !he distance to the closest ig-
neous rocks, and decide what this implied about the likelihood 01 volcanic ac-
tivity affecting their county.
The activities during Ihese four days are a repetition of Ihose On Days 7 and 8
within a larger geographic context. The focus on the county is enlarged to mul-
tiple states, including one wilh recent volcanic activity. Therefore, our earlier
analysis of Ihe activities in terms of Ihe Taxonomy Table applies here.
I began the ninth day by getting the students to think about the extensive-
ness of volcanic eruptions and the lact that their coun\y is only 30 miles away
Irom three other states, yet they have only looked at the geologic map 01 their
own state. When students' responses indicated they did not Seem to under-
stand the magnitude of volcanic eruptions, I reminded them that when MI.
St. Helens erupted, cities 100 miles away were covered with ash. Once eon-
vinced that the students understood why they were doing the task, I gave them
specific instructions about how to complete il. These instructions included
warnings about the different colors and different scales used on dilferent states'
maps, suggestions as to how to measure distances on their base maps, and a
reminder that the table 01 major rock types they had constructed should be
used as a key in determining whether or not a specilic rack is igneous.
The inslructions given to Ihe students are a combinalion of Factual knowledge
("warnings"), Procedural knowledge ("how lo"), and Conceptual knowledge ("table
of rock types"). Studenls are expected to remember factual knowledge, apply proce-
dural knowledge, and understand Conceptual knowledge.
The next three days (Days 10-12) I spent nearly all my time visiting
graups and assisting students with difficulties. Among the major difficulties
I noted were the following:
large amounts 01 data to be searched;
determining the "status" 01 metamorphosed igneous racks;
differences in map keys between states;
200 Section m The Taxonomy in Use
differenees in map seales;
variable methods 01 plotting data on base maps; and
variable methods 01 measuring the distanee 01 the closest igneous rocks.
COMMENTARY
In combination, these difficulties suggest problems with Factual knowledge (e.g.,
the sheer amount of data), Conceptual knowledge (e.g., rack types, map scales),
and Procedural knowledge (e.g., methods of plotting data and measuring dis-
tances on different maps). Any and all of these difficulties are likely to interfere
with the primary unit goal, understanding conceptual knowledge.
Day13
On Day 13, as part of an "assessment conversation," I selected several of the
base maps prepared by the students and projected them on the wall using an
opaque projector. As I projected eaeh map, one student lrom the group that
prepared it was asked to describe il. I spent most 01 my time helping students
resolve diserepaneies and disagreements about the types and ages 01 the
roeks, as well as the distanee 01 the closest igneous roeks lrom their eounty.
Unfortunately, the time and effort required to evaluate and improve the quality
01 eaeh map prevented me Irom helping students realize the limitations inher-
ent in the evidenee they were examining.
COMMENTARY
The eonflicts among students seem to relate to the areas of Conceptual knowledge
(types of racks) and Procedural knowledge (how to determine the ages of rocks;
how to determine distances of rocks from the eounty). Unfortunately, data on
type, age, and distance are perhaps the key factors in determining the likeli-
hood of volcanic activity in their county.
The time eame to ask students about the likelihood 01 voleanoes in their
eounty given the new evidence they had considered. About one in eight stu-
dents said they did not have sullieient evidenee to make a decision about the
potential lor volean ie aetivity. The rest of the students were ready to do so.
About hall of these students said it was possible that a voleano could affeet
the local region, eiting the distant old igneous racks as evidenee to support
their eonclusion. The other hall said that a voleano was not possible beeause
the voleanie raeks from the past were too far away to affeet them now.
COMMENTARY
The net result of the activities on Days 9-12 is to move students from consen-
sus (understand conceptual knowledge) to disagreement and dissension.
Chapter 12 Volcanoes? Here? Vignette 201
Day 14
By Day 14 I lelt pressured lar time. I hastened students through a portfolio
item in whieh they examined the loeation 01 their city in relation to the
boundaries between teetonic plates. They examined a eross-seetion through
the earth's erust and manlle Irom the Paeilie Oeean to the Atlantie Oeean. MI.
SI. Helens was near a plate boundary; their county was roughly 2,000 miles
away lrom the nearest plate boundary.
COMMENTARY
At this point in the unit, Mr. Parker re-introduces the theoretical basis for
examining and discussing the evidence: the theory of plate tectonies (Concep-
tual knowledge). In addition, he provides one key piece of Factual knowledge: the
students' county is nowhere near a plate boundary. Thus, he refoeuses students
on the prirnary objective: understand conceptual knowledge.
I managed to direct students' attention to the lact that MI. SI. Helens and
Yellowstone, two voleanie regions in the continental United States, have
something in common: rising magma. I also directed students to the lirst pages
01 the Researeh Materials Paeket, whieh showed a map 01 the world's tectonic
plates and a eross-seetion through the erust and manlle whieh shows how
magma rises near plate boundaries. With these materials, students proeeeded
to answer questions about the implieations of the theory 01 plate teetonies lar
the argument they were to eonstrue!.
COMMENTARY
This is more Factual knowledge ("voleanie regions have rising magma," "magma
rises near plate boundaries"): Factual knowledge is intended to help c1arify key
issues and thus enhanee understanding conceptual knowledge.
A summary of our analysis of the instruetional activities in terms of the
Taxonomy Table is shown in Table 12.2.
PART 3: ASSESSMENT
On the fifteenth day, I realized that the class remained split about the possibil-
ity of a voleano alleeting the area. Some students were eonvineed that ancient
igneous roeks loeated 150 miles away are still a possible threal. Nonetheless, I
was ready to have students begin drafting their letter to the County Commis-
sioner. My instruetions to the class emphasized the importanee 01 eoming to
an agreement within eaeh group and persuasively arguing lor whatever posi-
tion they took.
I evaluated eaeh 01 the letters the students drafted to submit lo Mr. Luek-
ino aeeording lo a rubrie (see Attaehment B at the end 01 the ehapter). Belore
12.2 ANALYSIS OF THE VOLCANOES VIGNETTE IN
TERMS OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON
INSTRUCTIONAl.. ACTIVITIES
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION A.
FACTUAL
KNOWL.EDGE
L 2. REMEMBER UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLY Days 3,4, 6-14 adívítíes
Days 3,4,7 actívítíes 4.
ANALYZE
Day2
adívíty
5.
EVALUATE
6.
CREATE
B.
CONCEPTUAL KNOWL.EDGE Objective 1;
Objective 2;
Objective 3
Days3-14
adívítíes
c.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
Day6 adívítíes Days 7-13
actívítíes
D.
META-
COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDGE
Key
Ob~~ve 1 = Unde:stand ~e theory of pIate tectorucs as an explanation far volcanoes.
Obl~ve 2 = Exanune and mterpret a set of data on the geology af the local reglan.
ObJective 3 = Compare the geology of the local region to piares that have volcanoes.
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapter 12 Volcanoes? Here? Vignette 203
applying Ihis rubric, however, I inviled sludents lo share Iheir lellers wilh Ihe
olher groupS. Sludents in Ihose groups were lo use Ihe rubric lo evaluale each
letter Ihey read. After Ihis exercise, sorne sludenl groups soughl permission lo
revise Iheir letters and were permitted lo do so. Even Ihough \he letters repre·
senled a wide range of opinion aboul Ihe cenlral queslion and conlained rec·
ommendations Ihal were diverse and divergent, I was pleased wilh Ihe high
level of Ihinking and underslanding Ihey reflect.
The rubric contains four criteria. The fust criterion, "accuracy of information in
surnmary," pertains primarily to remembering factual knowledge. The second cri-
terion, "consistency with the evidence," requires understanding conceptual
knowledge. A recomrnendation can only be consistent with evidence that is in-
terpreted in sorne way. The theory of plate tectonics provides the conceptual
framework for that interpretation. The third and fourth criteria are difficult to
classify. The third is "acknowledgment of alternative explanations." Explana-
tions, as mentioned earlier, require the construction of cause-and-effect mod-
els. The conslructed model is a form of Conceptual knowledge. The word "alter-
native," however, suggests that multiple models can be constructed and
students can generate altematives from the various models. If this is the case,
the verb would be "generating" (Create), with "alternative models" (Conceptual
knowledge) as the noun. The generation of models different fram the theory of
plate teclonics contradicts the first objective, however. Finally, the fourth erite-
rion is equally challenging. If we assume that a pracedure for writing such a
letler was taught to students in advance, then this criterion requires applying
procedural knowledge. If, however, studentshave to "figure it out on their own,"
then planning and producing are more likely the cognitive pracesses involved. '
In this case, then, the fourth criterion requires creating [based on] the vast array
of Factual, Conceptual, and Procedural knowledge included in the uni!.
In addition to Ihis formal assessmenl, I engaged in two "assessmenl
conversalions" during \he uni\. The firsl look place on Day 8 following Ihe
assignment in which sludents answered four queslions aboul rack types and
volcanism. The second look place on Day 13 and involved a class discussion
of Ihe sludents' base map projects.
As mentioned in our analysis of the inslructional aclivities, the questions in-
cJuded in the first assessment conversation can be cJassified as (1) remember fac-
tual knowledge, (2) understand conceptual knowledge, and (3) apply procedural
knowledge. In addition, the discussion of the base maps focuses on (1) under-
standing conceptual knowledge and (2) applying procedural knowledge.
The sumrnary of our analysis of the assessments in terms of the Taxonomy
rabie is presented in Table 12.3.
12.3 ANALYSIS OF THE VOLCANOES VIGNETTE IN TERMS OF
THE TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON ASSESSMENTS
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE 1. 2. 3 . DIMENSION REMEMBER UNDERSTAND ApPLY A.
P'ACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Days 3,4,
6-14
activities
AssessAl;
Assess B(1)
Days 3,4, 7
activities
4.
ANALYZE
Day2
activity
5.
EVALUATE
6.
CREATE
Assess B(4)
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
IAsSE!SS B(3, 4)
Day6
activities
Days 7-13
activities
AssessAl,2
Assess B(4)
D.
META-
COGNITIVE
KNOWLEDGE
Key
Ob~ec~ve, 1 = Unde~stand ~e theory of pIate tectonics as an explanation fer volcanoes.
Ob~ec~ve 2 = Exanune and mterpret a set of data on the geology of the local region.
Ob)ectlve 3 = Compare the geology of the local region to pIares that have volcanoes.
Assess A = Assessment conversations 1 and 2.
Assess B = Scoring rubric far letter to commlssioner; criteria 1, 2, 3, and 4.
Dark ~h ading in~ca~ ~e strongest alignment-an objective, an instructional activity, and an assessment are aU present in the same
cell Llghter shading Indicates two of the three are present.
Chapter 12 Volcanoes? Here? Vignette 205
PART 4: CLOSING COMMENTARY
In this section we examine tbe vignette in terms of our four basic questions: the
leaming question, tbe inslruction question, fue assessment question, and the
alignment question.
THE LEARNING QUESTION
The actual focal poin! of this unit is the culminating activity, the letter to the
County Comrnissioner. In tbe ¡eller the sludents were to offer tbeir recommen-
dation concerning the need for a "volcano emergency" plan. Objective 1 is in-
tended !o provide the theorelical basis for the recommendation; Objectives 2
and 3 are intended !o provide the empirical support for !he recommendation.
Whether tbe data do or do not lend support, however, tbe sludents must inter-
pret !he data. Interpretation requlres some combination ofProeedural knowledge
(i.e., how!o read geologic maps), Concep!w11 knowledge (Le., types of rocks), and
Fac!w11 ktwwledge (i.e., igneous rocks are critica! evidence for volcanism).
THE INSTRUCTION QUESTION
Afler tbe fusl few lessons, Mr. Parker relied extensively on "hands-on" activities.
For tbe last half of tbe unit, or about seVen ([ays, sludents were working simulta-
neously on remembering factual knowledge, understanding conceptual knowledge, and
applying proeedural knowledge. Unfortunalely, tbese activities !ook so long tbat Mr.
Parker had to move to a leclure mode near tbe end of tbe unit (Day 14) and slu-
den!s had only two dass sessions lO complete tbeir projects (Days 15 and 16).
THE ASSESSMENT QUESTION
Mr. Parker used what he referred to as "assessmen! conversations" lo deter-
mine whetber sludents were making progress !oward achieving tbe unit objec-
tives. Bo!h assessmen! conversations contained questions Iha! addressed re-
mernbering factual knowledge, understanding conceptual knowledge, and applying
procedural knowledge. The questions served a formative assessment purpose.
The major unit assessmen! was the group project. Each group had to pre-
pare a leller to send lo the County Commissioner indicating whetber he should
or should no! fund an evacuation plan and giving reasons for tbe specific rec-
ommendation. Each group's projec! was evalua!ed in !erms of a set of criteria.
The criteria fell into five cells of the Taxonomy Table: Al (remember factual
knowledge), BZ (understand conceptual knowledge), A6 (ereate [based on] factual
knowledge), B6 (create [based on] conceptual knowledge), and C6 (ereate [based on]
proeedural knowledge).
THE ALIGNMENT QUESTION
If all Ihree objectives are related to understand conceptual knowledge, as our ini-
tial analysis of fue statements of tbe objectives suggests, tben several alignment
206 Section m The Taxonorny in Use
problems are evident in Ihis unit (see Table 12.3). Redassifying Ihe second and
third objectives would produce a better alignment. Both of these objectives can
be written in a "how to" form: Students willlearn how lo examine and inter-
pret a set of data on Ihe geology of Ihe local region. Students willlearn how lo
compare Ihe geology of the local region to places that have volcanoes. In fact,
when we consider the lnstructional activities Ihemselves, how lo is what stu-
dents were expected to learn. As restaled, Ihese objectives now fall inlo ceD C3
(apply procedural knowledge). As such, bolh would be aligned wilh Ihe activities
on Days 7-13 and Ihe two assessment conversations.
Even with this change, however, olher alignment problems are evidenl in
Table 12.3. For example, only one of Ihe criteria on Ihe scoring rubric relates di-
rectly lo Ihe "lheoretical" objective (Objective 1). The olher criteria are associ-
ated wilh rernernberingfactual knowledge and creating [based] onfactual, concep-
tual, and procedural knowledge.
Similarly, Ihe alignmenl would be strengthened if students had spenl more
dass time "pulling things logelher" in preparing the group project. ApparentIy,
the project was done wilh little, if any, input from Ihe teacher. As such it was
dearly an assessmenl of student learning independent of leacher guidance and
assislance, unJike so many of Ihe projecls in Ihe other vignettes.
PART 5: CLOSING QUESTIONS
As wilh Ihe analysis of all our vignettes, we were left wilh a few unanswered
questions. We raise three of Ihe most important in this dosing section.
1. Whal is Ihe proper role of pre-instructional activities in the overall
delivery of inslruction? Mr. Parker planned a unit Ihal was supposed to
last eight days. By the end of Ihe first fOUI days, halfway Ihrough Ihe
"planned" unil, he had provided an orientation to Ihe students aboul the
unit, had Ihem determine Iheir lask, and had Ihem draw Iheir concep-
tualization of a volcano (labeling il approprialely and explaining how it
"works"). These activities, Ihough importanl, are not truly instructional
activities. We consider them "pre-instructional activities"; Ihat is, Ihey are
a "jumping off" point for instruclion. In light oí Mr. Parker's perceived
need for Ihese activities, he should have extended Ihe initial time esti-
mates for Ihe unit. This extension would likely have reduced Ihe time con-
straints Ihal he felt laler in Ihe unit. FinaIly, it is somewhat surprising Ihal
students were not asked lo re-draw Iheir conceptuaJization of a volcano as
a post-assessment. That would have been a direct assessment of leaming
relative to Ihe initial unit objective.
2. Should inslructional units be planned primarily in lerms of Ihe achieve-
menl of objectives or Ihe completion of activilies? AH available evidence
suggests Ihal midway through Ihe eighlh day Ihe students agreed !hat
volcanoes were very unlikely lo occur in their community. On Ihat basis,
Ihey could have begun lo write Iheir lellers to Ihe County Cornmissioner.
Mr. Parker had more activities planned for Ihe students, however, !hal re-
O1apter 12 Volcanoes? Here? Vígnette 207
quired studen!s to enlarge Ihe &cope of Iheir investigation beyond Ihe
county lines. Enlarging Ihe &cope was certainly a wor!hwhile activity, but
the result in relation to attaining Ihe overall unit goal seerns negative. The
consensus achieved at Ihe end of Day 8 was replaced by a diversity of
opinion by Ihe end of Day 12. The additional activities interfered wilh Ihe
consensual understanding each group needed to wrile Ihe letter to Ihe
County Cornmissioner. This example raises Ihe issue of Ihe proper rela-
tionship between objectives and lnslructional activities in planning and,
perhaps more importanl, in delivering an instructional unit.
3. Whal role can Ihe Taxonomy Table play in diagnosing learning prob-
lems? On Ihe sevenlh day, Mr. Parker's studenls were given fOUI ques-
tions lo answer. The first concerned rernernbering factual knowledge, Ihe sec-
ond and fourth questions pertained lo understanding conceptual knowledge,
and Ihe third question asked students lo apply · procedural knowledge. The
nexl day, Mr. Parker engaged in an "assessment conversation" wilh his
students based on Iheir answers to Ihese fOUI questions. During Ibis con-
versation he learned that students did rernernber Ihe factual knowledge and
had achieved sorne degree of understanding of the conceptual knowledge.
But Ihey apparentIy had difficulty applying procedural knowledge. Once this
problem was addressed, studenls gained Ihe level of understanding Ihat
Mr. Parker sought. This example points to Ihe possibility of using Ihe Tax-
onomy Table lo pinpoint deficiencies in studenl learning. When deficien-
cies are identified, future inslruction can be altered to help students over-
comelhem.
ATTACHMENT A LETTER FROM COMMISSIONER LUCKINO
Oep.rtmen! of Engineering .nd Public S.fety
County Commissioner's Office
Anytown, USA 12345
April lO
Re: Earthquake and Voleano Hazard Study for Dur County
It is well known Ihat earthquakes and voleanoes can destroy property and injure or even kili people. In January, a majar earthquake
rocked los Angeles, (alilomia. The earthquake killed many people and caused an estimated 30 billion dollars in damage to homes,
businesses, roads, and bridges. In May 01 1980, Ihe MI. SI. Helens Voleano in Washington erupted violently. The loree 01 the voleanie
eruption tare trees out 01 the ground 15 miles away. (Ioser to home, two earthquakes struck a town 100 miles Irom us in January,
and an earthquake shook Metropolis in 1986. (ould an earthquake strong enough to destroy bridges and buildings strike our
eounty? Need we be coneerned about a voleano?
We need you to study Ihe geology 01 our area and tell us whether o, not a damaging earthquake o, voleano might happen here.
Your results will help us decide il our county should prepare a plan lar a geologic hazard. Such a plan would involve preparing lar
an evaeuation and making emergency medieal plans.
lhis challenging and important problem will require effort and creativity to salve. lo assist you in Ihis !ask, we gathered geologic
data Irom lederal and state geological alfices. This inloonation ineludes geologic maps, eross-sections, oil well drilling records, and
rack samples. We also asked Ihat a Researeh Materials Paeketbe sent to yOU. We Ihink it will help you to interpret geologie evi-
denee. The paeket has a summary 01 the theory 01 plate tectonies, which will help you understand the causes 01 earthquakes and
volcanoes. It also contains newselippings about reeent earthquakes and voleanoes, and inlormation on the geology 01 places that
have Irequent earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.
Your task is to use this inlormation to inter¡¡ret Ihe geology 01 ou, area, compare your results to places that have many earthquakes
((alilomia) and voleanoes (MI. SI. Helens, Washington), and decide il our county needs a salety and evacuation plan.
lhe final report tha! you submit to our offiee should inelude:
A Yoor decision as to !he likelihood Ihat a damaging earthquake andlor a volcano will affect our county.
B. An explanation 01 your decisi on that is supported by eomparing Ihe evidenee you have studied to seientifie theory lar Ihe
causes 01 earthquakes arid voleanoes.
C. Maps that show any voleanic raeks and past earthquakes in our region.
D. A geologi e cross-section through OUf coonty showing Ihe underground strucrure 01 racks.
E . Any olher items and explanations Ihat you Ihink support your decision.
During the next several weeks, prolessional geologists may visit your elassroom to look at your work. They may ask you to talk
abou! the way you are thinking and reasoning about this problem. lhese scientists will be involved in the review 01 your final reporto
Thank you lar you r attenti on to Ihis most important matter. Good luek!
S incerely yours,
Fred luekino
County Commissioner
208
ATTACHMENT B RUBRIC FOR SCORING PERFORMANCE ON
THE EARTHQUAKE UNIT TERMINAL TASK
Delinition 01 th~ task: Acting in the eapacity 01 a scientist who understands voleanoes and theories eoneerning their causes and
geographical distribution, examine Ihe geological data 01 our region and compare those data with correspondlng data lram Cahlor-
nia. Based on yoor findings, write a letter to our (oonty Commissioner Ihat ineludes a summary 01 your lindmgs Iha! IS accurate and
a recommendation eoncerning Ihe need 10 invest money in preparing an Earthquake Evacuation Plan lor our regl an. The recommen-
dation should be consistent with the evidence you have collected and it should aeknowledge alternative explanatlans.
Criteria levels 01 Performance
Accuracy of information in summary 3-lhe inlormation in Ihe summary is complete and aeeurate.
2-Some important information is missing, misconstrued,
misrepresented in the summary.
l-Significant portions of!he summary are inaccurate andlor
important data are missing.
(onsistency with the evidence 3-Recommendations are consistent with the evidence that is
available.
2-Recommendations are generally consistent with Ihe evidence
Ihat is availabl.......,;light inconsistencies are ignored in Ihe
letter.
l-Reeommendations are in large part inconsistent with the
evidence.
Acknowledgment 01 altemative explanations 3-Recommendations are nieely qualified in terrns 01 rival
explanations lar the findings 01 Ihe study.
2-Recommendations are advanced, with a eaveat added to
acknowledge rival explanatioos, bU! !he caveat appears more
as an • add-on· Ihan as a fully integrated piece 01 Ihinking.
1-Recornmendations appear to be shrill and definite----wilh
only little (or no) acknowledgment 01 rival explanations.
(Iarity 3-Reeommendations are s!ated sucdnctly andpresented in a
logical arder. Diagrams and drawings are labeled and easy to
understand.
2-lhe link hetween narratives and diagrams is difficult to make.
Recommendation is vague.
l-Recommendation is not responsive to the !ask. Recommendation is
not supported wilh evidenee.
Perfect Seore = 12
209
CHAPTER 13
Report Writing Vignette
This vignette describes a Ill1it on report writing developed by Ms. Christine
Evans and Ms. Deanne McCreadie, both 01 whom also taught it. Ms. Colleen
Vandie, the teacher in the vignette, represents them and their experiences.
This unit was taught to a elass 01 lourth-grade ehildren during the early
spring, after the elass members had learned to work with one another and after
some basie writing criteria had been studied and mastered by most 01 Ihe elass.
The elass ineluded 28 students, 13 boys and 15 girls. About hall 01 the class
were minorities-Asian Americans, African Americans, and Hispanic Ameri-
eans. The class represented a considerable spread in aeademie ability. How-
ever, none 01 the ehildren was identilied as needing special edueation serviees.
There is a strong sense 01 edueational aecountability in the state, with
students, teachers, and parents being very eonseious 01 the state conten!
standards and the consequenees 01 not meeting those standards. As a eonse-
quenee, I earelully seleeted the objeetives lor this unit so they elo.ely COrre-
sponded with the state Content Standards lor English language Arts. Indeed,
even the language in whieh the objectives are phrased refleets the standards.
My students will be assessed on these standards at the elose 01 the lifth-grade
year, and sludents who fail to meet the standards will be required to attend
summer sehool andlar be retained in fifth grade until they mee! them. Thus, I
was coneerned about preparing al/ the students lar this "high stakes" assess-
men!. Final/y, because 01 the state emphasis on teaehing thematical/y, in ways
that integrate various disciplines, this unit emphasizes language arts topies
while at the same time addressing important lourth-grade social studies topies.
Based on my previous experienee with this unit, I al/oeated six weeks to
complete i!. Eaeh day, we spent about 90 minutes on the uni!.
PART t: OS..IECTIVES
There were lour principal objeetives. The students should leam to:
1. identify, locate, and select sources 01 information related to writing a report
on a famous persan in American history;
210
COMMENTARY
Chapter 13 Roporl Writing Vignette 211
2. seleet information about a lamous person in American history that is rele-
vant to the purposes 01 their written and oral reports;
3. write inlormative text that communieates to elassmates and other appropri-
ate audienees in the school important aspeets of the life of a lamous person
in American history and whieh ineludes students' opinions of how the
famous American's contributions impacted society¡ and
4. deliver a talk to Ihe elass about a portion of the written repor!. (The talk
should inelude the essential infmmation pertaining to the segment 01 the
lamous person's life the student has eleeted to share, and be well organized
and delivered in an elleetive manner.)
Objective 1 eontains three verbs: "identify," "locate," and "select." The key lo
cJassifying this objective is the verb "select." In Table 5.1, on the back inside
cover, selecting is an alternative name for differentiating, which is a cognitive
process in the category Analyze. From aH avaílable materíals, students are to
differentíate Ihose that are relevant lo writing a report on a person famous in
American history from those that are not. The noun phrase in Objective 1 is
"sources of information." As noted in previous vignettes, sources of informa-
tion are materials. Thus, the noun phrase provides us with little help in deter-
ntining the relevant type of knowledge. One scenario ís !hat students willleam
(or have leamed) criteria for dístinguishing relevant from irrelevant materíals.
This suggests Conceptual knowledge (e.g., "What makes relevant materíals rele-
vant materíals?"). A second scenario is that students will be taught a procedure
for identifying, localing, and selecting relevant materíals. This case involves
Procedural knowledge. If Procedural knawledge ís at íssue here, however, then stu-,
dents would be expected to apply procedural knowledge (i.e., carry out the steps¡:
If we stay with Analyze, the most appropriate placement of the objective in
the Taxonomy Table is in cell B4, analyze [based on] conceptual knowledge
(although the altemative inference, apply procedural knowledge, is certainly not
unreasonable).
Objective 2 contains the single verb "select." Again, then, we are dealíng
with differentiating (Analyze). The noun is "information" (rather than "sources
of informalíon"). The statement of the objective includes qualifiers that pertain
to the information to be selecled from the located sources. The information
must be (1) about a famous person in American history and (2) relevant to
preparing written and oral reports. The first qualifier is simply a restatemenl
of what was already included in the first objective. The second qualífier, how-
ever, is unique. Of aJl the information available about the famous American,
students must select the most relevant-relevant to the preparation of wrítten
and oral reports. In combination, aJl of these clues support the placement of
Objective 2 in the same cell as the first one, B4 (analyze [based on] conceptual
knowledge).
212 Section 1II Tho Taxonomy in Use
For her last two objectives, Ms. Vandie is interested in having her students
leam to construct products: a manuscript ("informative text") for Objective 3
and a talk (based on tite written text) for Objective 4. Thus, the meaning of the
two ambiguous verbs, "write" and "deliver," is clarified within the context of
the entire objective. They both signify "constructing," an altemative term for
producing, which is a cognitive process in tite Create category.
Much of tite information contained in these two objectives pertains to the
criteria tltat will be used to evaluate tite products. The manuscript will be eval-
uated in terms of (1) cornmunication witlt an identified audience, (2) important
aspects of the person's life, and (3) the writer's opinions of the impact of the
person's contributions on society. The talk will be evaluated according to
whether it (1) includes essential information, (2) is well organized, and (3) is
delivered in an effective manner. Because these are tite criteria used for the pur-
pose of evaluation, knowledge oI tltem constitutes Conceptual knowledge. In ad-
dition to this Conceptual knowledge, students need to have knowledge of fairly
specific details about the person being written or spoken about (i.e., Factual
knowledge). Thus, these last two objectives are placed in two cells of tite Taxon-
omy Table: A6 (create [based onl/actual knowledge) and B6 (create [based onl con-
ceptual knowledge).
A summary of tite analysis of the objectives in terrns of the Taxonomy Table
is provided in Table 13.1.
PART 2: INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
Lesson 1
I introduced the unit to the students by describing in some length what com-
prises the lormat of a written and an oral informative reporto Through class dis-
cussion, and using the blackboard to record relevant contributions from the
class, emphasis was given to purpose, audience, sources of information, and
other elements derived from the state standards document and elsewhere. In
combination, these criteria were adapted lrom the Delaware General Rubric
lor Writing. I ended the discussion by displaying a "kid-friendly" rubric lor the
written report (Attachmenl A) and set 01 rating sea les for the oral presentation
(Attachment B). These were to be used by students as they planned their re-
ports and by me as I assessed the quality 01 their work.
COMMENTARY
As shown in Attachment A (at the end of tite chapter), the rubric contains five
criteria for gttiding and evaluating written reports: development, organization,
word choice, sentence formation, and writing rules. The elass discussion gwde-
lines inelude other criteria: purpose, audience, and sources of information. Fi-
nally, tite ratings scales in Attachment B (at the end of the chapter) provide a
third set of criteria. In our frarnework, knowledge of criteria is associated with
I
13.1 ANALYSIS OF THE REPORT WRITING VIGNETTE IN
TERMS OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON
STATED OBJECTIVES
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION 1- REMEMBER 2. UNDERSTAND 3. ApPLY 4. ANALYZE s. EVALUATE 6.
CREATE
A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 3
Objective 4
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Objective 1 Objective 2 Objective 3
Objective 4
c.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
.
D.
META-
COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDGI!:
Key . . .
Objective 1 = Select sources of information related to writing a report on a famous person in Amencan history.
Objective 2 = Select information about a famoos person in American history that is relevant to the purposes of students' written and
oral reports.
Objective 3 = Write infonnative text that commurucates to classmates and other appropriate audiences in the school important aspects
of the life of a famous person in American history and that includes students' opinirnlS of how the famous A.merican's
c:ontributions impacted society.
Objective 4 = Deliver a talk to the c1ass about a portion of the written reporto
213
214 Section lIT The Taxonorny in Use
Conceptuallcnowledge. At this point, we are not certain of the appropriate cogni-
tive process to use with Conceptuallcnowledge. It seems reasonable to assume,
however, that because Lesson 1 is introductory, the teacher's intent is simply to
provide an overview of the criteria. Consequently, the objective we infer from
this activity falls into the process category Remember; that is, students should
remember conceptuallcnowledge.
Lesson 2
lhe second lesson dealt with "taking notes" and identifying themes. I began
by showing the class a short video, asking the students to take notes on large
pieces of construction paper, cut into lourths. (1 believed that using the video
instead 01 a passage lrom a book as a prompt decreased the chances that stu-
dents would elect to copy passages straight from the tex!.) lhe plan was to
post the notes the students took on the blackboard so that the whole class
could see them and comment on them. Students shared their notes and as I
taped them to the blackboard, the class discussed the fact that some notes
could be grouped together on the same topic or theme. I moved the notes
around on the blackboard at the direction 01 class members until there were
several groupings. lhe students were then invited to give each grouping a title.
COMMENTARY
It seems fairly clear that the cognitive process emphasized is classifying (Under-
stand). Since sludents are placing specific "notes" into thematic categories and
then naming them, two types of knowledge are involved: Conceptual knowledge
and then Factuallcnowledge. The Conceptual knowledge is for Understanding; the
Factuallcnowledge is to be Remembered.
Ms. Vandie begins to implement a sequence of activities often used in con-
nection wifu producing (Create) a product. The procedure illustrates scaffold-
ing and modeling. Scaffolding is seen in moving fue task from scaled-down
simpler versions of fue materials under sludy to "fue real fuing" when sludents
are working on their class projects. Ms. Vandie' s modeling procedures show
fue students how to proceed and also prompt fuem by "thinking aloud" behav-
iors on fue teacher' s part.
Lesson 3
During the next lesson, I read a book aloud and modeled how I would take
notes on the passages that I read. lhe students also took notes as I was read-
ing. As belore, the notes were posted on the blackboard, placed into groups,
and the groups 01 notes were given titles. Students then read in unison a pas-
sage displayed on the overhead projector. lhey watched as I modeled note
COMMENTARY
Chapler 13 Reporl Writing Vignette 215
taking and the classilication 01 notes. As I was pasting my notes on the board, I
prompted the students by "thinking aloud" about the decisions I was making
about grouping the notes and about titling the groups.
After a question-and-answer session, I engaged the students in note taking
with another common reading, one that was considerably longer than the pas-
sage on the overhead projector. Each student had a photocopy 01 a lour-page
essay about George Washington Carver, and they were instructed to take notes
on the passage. Working in small groups, with approximately lour students in
each group, students entered the notes they had taken on "Post-It" slips and
grouped them on a large sheet 01 poster papero As a group, the students classi-
lied their notes and attempted to name the groups they lormed.
As I observed the students' progress at this point, I decided the students
needed additional instruction in note taking. I called the class back together
and once again modeled note-taking procedures. lhe students then returned
to working within their groups. When the lesson was complete, the groups re-
ported the results 01 their work to the entire class. In the discussion that en-
sued, the class identilied those groupings that seemed to be most helplul in
learning about George Washington Carver.
In this lesson fue teacher is teaching by modeling. The issue becomes what
students are expected to leam from this approach to teaching. Are they to de-
velop Procedural knowledge, which they are fuen to Apply to fue note-taking-
grouping-naming sequence? Are they to develop Metacognitive Icnowledge (i.e.,
fueir own unique strategy) for performing the task? To complicate mallers fur-
fuer, fue second step of fue sequence involves cognitive processes in fue category
Analyze. At present, fuen, we opt for two objectives: apply procedurallcnowledge
and analyze conceptuallcnowledge. Alfuough not an objective in its own right, apply
metacognitive Icnowledge may be part of fue analyze conceptuallcnowledge activity.
Lesson 4
During the next lesson, I asked the students, still working in groups, to read a
book that locused on the lile of Matthew Henson, a lamous American. AII the
children in the class were expected to read the same book. Students who were
not reading at grade level were paired with a partner or listened to the book
on audiotape. lhe members 01 each group were lhen asked to select as a
group the aspect 01 his lile they would like to emphasize and describe to the
class. Each group needed to choose one aspect 01 Matthew Henson's life---
childhood, adulthood, awards, contributions to society, and so lorth. Each
group used the note-taking-grouping-naming approach to record and to orga-
nize the important facts concerning their single aspect 01 Henson's lile. I made
overhead transparencies of each group's "final" product, and the notes and
216 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
elassilications with tilles were shared in elass and critiqued by the elass. I
made a point to commend those elements apparent in the groups' work that
complied with my standards 01 good note taking.
COMMENTARY
At least four verbs help us decide on the eognitive processes being sought by
the teaeher: "seleet" (Analyze), "use" (Apply), "organize" (Analyze), and "cri-
tique" (Evaluate). The first three verbs suggest that Lesson 4 is a follow-up ae-
tivity to Lesson 3. Thus, we continue with analyze conceptual knowledge and ap-
ply procedural knowledge. We add evaluate [based on] conceptual knowledge.
Students are evaluating based on the eategories (eoneepts), not on the proeess
(proeedure) studenls use to arrive at them.
Lessons 5-8
During the next several lessons the emphasis shifted to having students id en-
tily lamous persons they wanted to nominate to their group members as an ob-
ject 01 intense study. I gave them a list 01 lamous Americans lrom which they
could choose. The list ineluded men, women, Whites, Alrican Americans,
Asían Americans, Native Americans, Hispanic Americans, Presidents, inven-
tors, civil rights workers, and many others. Besides making an effort to allow
students to make choices lrom options that rellected the cultural and ethnic di-
versity olthe United States, I was carelul to see to it that the schoollibrary had
several appropriate books lor each 01 the names on my I isl.
Students were given time to explore the options available to them. Some
students had never heard 01 the "Iamous" people on the lisl. Some students
looked them up on the Internet or in the library, or asked me questions about
them.
Alter several dass periods 01 exploration, the students were ready to en-
gage in a process lor making group decisions about the person they would be
studying. Interestingly, some boys chose to report on women and so me girls
elected to write about meno Both white and black students opted to study la-
mous Americans 01 different races. Although their reasons were not elear to
me, I was pleased with the variety 01 student choices. In their groups, students
tried to "sell" their prelerred choice to the others in the group. Using democra-
tic procedures, each group chose one lamous American to study lar the pur-
poses 01 addressing the objectives 01 this unil.
COMMENTARY
This four-day proeess of choosing a person for study does not relate direetly to
any of the objeetives assoeiated with this uni!. Certainly, though, learning to
work together, learning to take the views of others into aeeount, and learning
to value demoeratie proeesses are important outeomes of schooling. In faet, the
COMMENTARY
Chapter 13 Report Writing Vignette 217
teaeher may well have eourse or year-long objectives that deal with these in-
tended outeomes. The point is that we will not attempt to classify these aetivi-
ties in terms of the Taxonomy Table for this uni!.
Lesson 9
The next lesson dealt with preparing a bibliography. Students were encour-
aged to search their lamily's libraries, the schoollibrary, the Internet, and other
sources to lind books and artides on the lamous American they had selected. I
helped students with reading difficulties to locate appropriate resources. I be-
gan this lesson by sharing books about George Washington Carver, describing
how this lirst collection 01 books could be sorted in terms 01 uselulness and
how they might be entered into a bibliography. One or two books were dearly
quite difficult and induded inlormation not accessible to lourth-grade stu-
dents. Another was a picture book written lor primary students that induded
very little text about George Washington Carver. Four or live books were "on
target" in terms 01 their appropriateness lar the assignmenl. The students
watched as I sorted the books and discussed why some 01 the sources were
more uselul than were others. I then demonstrated how to prepare a bibliogra-
phy chart lor the sources deemed most uselu!.
Two objeetives seem important here. The first is learning to differentiate books
(Le., sourees of information) in terms of their usefulness for the projeet (the cri-
teria on whieh to differentiate them). This objeetive is classified as analyze
[based on] conceptual knowledge. The seeond objeetive is learning how to pre-
pare a bibliography charlo Without more information, we classify this objeetive
as apply procedural knowledge. If it were taught as a generic strategy rather than
as unique to social studies, however, the aetivity would be apply metacognitive
knowledge.
Lessons 10-16
Beginning with Lesson 10 and lasting about live days, the students began re-
searching the lamous American their group had selected lor study. Students
searehed in the library and on computers to lind relevant sources. Working
dosely with the Media Specialist in the school, I had arranged lor the dass to
spend several periods in the library. Students pored over the sources that were
available to them, determining whether the sources provided potentially uselul
information about their famous American.
My intent was that students would behave as "real" researehers and deter-
mine tapies as they began the research process. For the lirst two days (Lessons
10 and 11), the students only reviewed books and took notes on Post-It notes.
218 Section nI The Taxonomy in Use
It was a quiet time lor everyone to do sorne reading and to take notes. At the
end 01 each day, the group members simply stuck the notes onto their poster
board. At the end 01 these two days, the group members began to review their
notes and began moving them around to determine the themes that individual
group members might address. I emphasized the importance 01 cooperation
during group work so that all group members were able to participate. Post-It
notes that included several ideas olten needed to be rewritten so the notes lit
only one category. These categorization activities lasted another three days
(Lessons 12-14).
In monitoring their work, I lound that sorne groups 01 students were
unable to locate themes-even alter preparing as many as 50 Post-It notes.
When the students tried to sort the cards into themes, no common threads
seemed apparent to them. Alter they had struggled with the "finding themes"
assignment unsuccesslully for two days, I elected to help students. Either
I would suggest a theme or two that I saw rellected in the group's notes or
I would urge the student to reread particular passages lrom the books they
had located.
COMMENTARY
The emphasis in this set of seven lessons is on students using lhe three-step
procedure lhey had been taught in Lessons 3 and 4: (1) take notes, (2) catego-
rize notes according to lhemes, and (3) name lhe lheme. Here we have Analyze
embedded within Procedural knowledge; lhat is, lhe second step of lhe procedure
requires !hat sludents engage in lhe process of differentiating. Because lhis step
is a part of the application process, we categorize the objective here as apply
procedural knowledge.
Now, alter several days 01 note taking, the groups' reading and research
became more locused as group members began reading more deeply into the
themes that had "bubbled up" lrom the note-taking process. By Lesson 15, I
asked the groups to determine how the themes would be divided among the
group members for presentation. Each group member was to be assigned a
uniquetheme. In this way, the individual student reports were less likely to be
overlapping in content and each would be more likely to look and sound
quite difieren!.
Alter reviewing the sources pertinent to the selected themes, each student
prepared a carefully constructed bibliographical chart, as they had been pre-
viously taught (Lessons 15 and 16). These were given to me at the end 01
Lesson 16. I found that sorne 01 them were skimpy, listing only one or two
sources. I tried to help these students either to lind more material or to choose
another famous persono Other students included books or other materials that
were well beyond their reading levels. I assisted these students in linding more
appropriate sources.
COMMENTARY
COMMENTARY
Chapler 13 Report Writing Vignette 219
The phrase lhat helps us categorize this activity is "as lhey had been previously
taught." The sludents were taught a particular procedure for preparing lheir
bibliographic char! and are expected to follow il. Thus, we place this activity in
the Taxonomy Table in cen C3 (apply procedural knowledge).
In Lesson 15, the sludents determined how lhe themes would be divided
among the group members for presentation. This activity fans in lhe same cate-
gory as the activities of Lessons 5-8 and so also is no! c1assified in lhe Taxon-
omy Table for this unit (see lhe discussion on pages 216-217).
Lessons 17-20
Beginning with Lesson 17 and continuing through Lesson 20, 'Ye moved into
a "Writers' Workshop" mode. Studenls dralted their written reports on lhe
themes rellecled in the lives 01 their famous persons. I held conferences with
individual students on the contenl and organization of lheir written reports.
Several sludenls needed more than one conlerence. Early dralts were read by
fellow students who gave suggestions in peer conferences about how the re-
ports could be improved. In reading the drafts, the students used the "kid-
friendly" rubrics that were introduced to them on the lirst day 01 the unit to
guide lheir comments and suggestions. The rubric was somewhal conlusing to
sorne students, so I brought them together in a small group to explicitly teach
lhe criteria and descriptors that were designed to guide their writing. In addi-
tion, the students had access lo a Revision and Editing Checklisl (see Attach-
ment C at the end 01 the chapter) that had been used olten in previous Writers'
Workshop activities in the class. After intensive work in class (and at home),
the projects were handed in on time.
The activities during lhese four lessons focus on producing lhe written reports
(Create) and critiquing early drafts of them (Evaluate). "Producing" requires
bolh Factual knowledge (the specifics) and Conceptual knowledge (lhe themes).
"Critiquing" requires primarily Conceptual knowledge (namely, lhe scoring
rubric and lhe Revision and Editing Checklist). Thus, we place lhese activities
in cens A6 (creating [based onlfactual knowledge), B6 (creating [based onl concep-
tual knowledge), and B5 (evaluating [based onl conceptual knowledge).
Lessons 21-30
However, the unil was nol linished when the written reports were submitted.
What remained was the oral reporting! At this point, students were asked to re-
view the rating scales used to evaluate oral reports (see Attachment B). Students
220 Section ID The Taxonomy in Use
were asked to select and share with their group members the aspect 01 their
lamous person's lile they intended to presen!. The group listened to the plans
each 01 its members had lor sharing-and how they might make the oral pre-
sentation informative and interesting. Some students planned to wear a cos-
tume that would represent the person they were describing. Others planned to
share various artilacts that would provide some concrete examples. Still others
prepared displays. Each student understood that his/her report was to take no
longer than live minutes. I allocated 25 minutes a day lor 10 days to the oral
reporting-giving students a briel time to respond to an oral report with ques-
tions and/or comments (Lessons 21-30). This activity culminated six weeks 01
instruction on the unit.
To analyze this activity in terms of the Taxonomy Table, we must rely on lhe
rating scales used to evaluate oral reports (Attachment B). Because lhe }"ating
,Pcales are cEleg..a. we suggest lhat lhey represent Conceptual knowledge. The pres-
entations are based on Factual knowledge. We furlher suggest that students are
expected to use lhe ratings scales in planning their oral presentations. Thus, we
believe lhe appropriate cognitive process category is Create. The inferred objec-
tive, then, takes the form create [based on] conceptual knowledge and factual
knowledge (since factual knowledge comprises lhe raw material for lhe written
report).
A summary of our analysis of the entire set of instructional activities in
terms of lhe Taxonomy Table is shown in Table 13.2.
PART 3: ASSESSMENT
I assessed and evaluated my students' learning throughout the uni!. Specili-
cally, I assessed and coached them in their use 01 research procedures, in their
evaluations 01 materials, in their selections 01 themes, and in their writing as-
signments. When students needed more individual guidance, I provided them
with explicit instruction to improve their understanding. In this effort, I relied
on the judgments 01 my colleague, the Media Specialist, who also observed
very carelully the progress the students were making.
I worked closely with the students as they located and selected inlorma-
tion about the lamous Americans they were studying. Some students were
lacile in using the library and the computer to locate inlormation. Others were
less resourcelul. I continued to coach those students who were having diffi-
culty and engaged the more sophisticated students in helping their lellow
group members who were having some difficulty. Alter consulting with the
Media Spetialist and considering my own notes in my journal, I was con-
vinced that almost everyone improved in this area by the end 01 the uni!.
13.2 ANALYSIS OF THE REPORT WRITING VIGNETTE IN
TERMS OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON
INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION 1. REMEMBER 2. 3. UNDERSTAND ApPLY 4. ANALYZE 5.
EVALUATE
6.
CREATE
A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Lesson 2
activities
Objective 3;
Objective 4
Lessons 17-20
activities;
Lessons21-30
. activities
B. CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE Lesson 1 activities Lesson 2 activities Objective 1;
Objective 2 Lessons 3, 4, 9 activities :
Lesson 4
iKtivities;
I Lessons
/ 17-20
activities
.
Objective 3;
Objective 4
Lessons 17-20
activities;
Lessons21-30
activities
c.
PROCEDURAL KNOWLEDGE Lessons 3,4
activities;
Lessons 9-14
activities;
Lesson 16
activities
D.
META-
COGNITIYE
KNOWLEDGE
Key
Objective 1 = Select sources of infonnation related to writing a report on a famous person in American history.
Objective 2 = Select information about a famous person in American history that is relevant to the purposes of students' written and
oral reports.
Objective 3 = Write informative text that communicates to classmates and other appropriate audiences in the school important aspects
of the life of a famous person in American history and that includes students' opinions of how the famous American's
contributions impacted society.
Objective 4 = Deliver a talk to the class about a portion of the written reporto
Note: As discussed in the text, activities related to Lessons 5-8 and 15 are not analyzed in terms of the Taxonomy Table. 22 1
222 Section ID The Taxonomy in Use
The Media Specialist and I paid strict attention to Ihe judgments students
made in selecting resources to use ín their reports. As in mast areas, sorne
students needed more help than others. The seleclion process was con-
founded nol only by the factor "relevance" but also by "accessibility." Some
students were able to select relevant sources, but the reading levels of the
sources were loo diffi cult lor them. Ind ividual assistance at this time beca me
very importan!. Nevertheless, by the end of the unil, we were confident that
most of the students grasped the idea of "relevance" in making their choices
01 materials.
To evaluate the third and fourth objectives, I was able to use the Primary
Trait Scoring Guide (see Attachment D) and the ratings scales for oral reports
(Attachment B), respectively. The results suggest that while most 01 the stu-
dents seemed to have met the standards set for these two objectives, some
had no!. I carefully studied the efforts olthose who had not performed well to
identify areas of weakness. Since the unit was taught in early March, there was
time to re-teach some of these important skills and understandings in subse-
quent units.
COMMENTARY
Both informal and formal assessments are made of student leaming. The infor-
mal assessments take place during Lesson 3, Lessons 10 and 11, and Lesson 16.
In Lesson 3, the assessment focuses on sludents' note-taking skiUs (Le., how to
take notes). This represents apply procedural knowledge. In Lessons 10 and 11, lhe
assessment focuses on students' ability to locate lhemes (Le., to analyze lhe in-
formation on lhe Post-It notes). This represents analyze conceptual knowledge
(wilh Conceptual knowledge used in the !hemes or categories formed by lhe stu-
dents). Finally, the assessment during Lesson 16 focuses on the bibliography
prepared by lhe sludents. Concerns are raised by lhe teacher over !he number
of entries and reading levels of lhe materials included. Since this assessment
clearly relates to the first two objectives, we classify it as analyze conceptual
knowledge (allhough, as mentioned in our diseussion of lhese objectives, lhere
is an element of apply procedural knowledge as weU).
The two formal assessments are lhe written reports and oral presentations.
To analyze lhese assessments, we focus fust on the Primary Trait Scoring Guide
(Attachment D) and lhe rating seales used to evaluate oral reports (Attachment
B). Bolh are conceptual frameworks lhat can be used to evaluate the quality of
the products produced by the students. It is important to note lhat lhe verb
"evaluate" here pertains to the teacher, not the students. The issue for us is
what is being evaluated, and simply stated, it is !he products lhat lhe sludents
have created. The products contain bolh Factual knowledge (details) and Concep-
tual knowledge (!hemes). We suggest, lherefore, that we are dealing with creating
[based on]factual and conceptual knowledge. Hence, we place our infened objec-
tives in two ceUs: A6 (crea te [based on] factual knowledge) and B6 (crea te [based
on] conceptual knowledge).
Chapler 13 Report Writing Vignette 223
A summary of our analysis of bolh lhe informal and formal assessments in
terms of the Taxonorny Table is shown in Table 13.3.
PART 4: CLOSING COMMENTARY
In this section we examine !he vignette in terms of our four basic questions: lhe
learning question, the instruction question, the assessment question, and the
alignment question.
THE LE:ARNING QUESTION
As lhe vignette title suggests, this is a unit on repor! writing. The overall pur-
pose of lhe unit is for sludents to leam to write research papers and to leam to
deliver portions of those papers ora11y. This purpose is best captured in Objec-
tives 3 and 4 (see Table 13.1). In tenns of lhe Taxonomy Table, this ma;n pur-
pose can be represented as create [written reports and oral presentations from)
factual and conceptual knowledge. Within lhe context of lhe entire unit, Objectives
1 and 2 are best considered prerequisites to or facilitative of Objectives 3 and 4.
They are very important prerequisites or facilitators, lhough. When sludents
achieve the first two objectives, lhey have acquired the "raw material" they
need for Objectives 3 and 4. Achieving Objectives 1 and 2, however, requires
lhat sludents are able to Analyze material in terms of its relevance, importance,
and, in the case of fourth-grade sludents, readability. To do this, they need to
understand the meaning of II r~levance," "importance," and ureadability,"
which requires Conceptual knowledge.
THE INSTRUCTION QUESTION
The early activities (Lessons 1 and 2) were intended to introduce lhe unit lo the
sludents (see Table 13.2). Ms. Vandie told sludentS about criteria !hat would be
used to evaluate their final products, and lhe sludents began to explore how
lhey were to go about choosing lhe information that would evenlua11y find its
way into lhe final produels.
As shown in Table 13.2, many lessons were devoted to applying procedural
knowledge. The teacher expected students to use a three-step procedure in mov-
ing from lhe available resources to preparation for writing lhe reporto (1) take
notes, (2) group lhe notes according to lhemes, and (3) assign a name to each
lheme. In these lessons, the teacher modeled the procedure. In addition, she
provided individual assistance (i.e., "coaching") to those sludents who were
unable to apply the procedure. It is instructive to note lhat the three-step pro-
cedure assumes lhat proper materials have been seleeled. The validity of this
assumption is called ¡nto question by lhe teacher's descriptions of Lessons 15
13.3 ANALYSIS OF THE REPORT WRITING VIGNETTE IN TERMS
OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE BASED ON ASSESSMENTS
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS DIMENSION
THE
KNOWLEDGE DIMENSION A.
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
1.
REMEMBER
2.
UNDERSTAND
3.
ApPLY
4.
ANALYZE
5.
EVALUATE
6.
Lesson 2
activities
B.
CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE
Lesson 1
activities
Lesson 2
activities
Lesscn4
activities;
L esscns 17-20
activities
C.
PROCEDURAL
KNOWLEDGE
Lessons3,4
activities;
Lessons 9-14
actMties;
Inson 16
activities
IA5';ess In1, In3
D.
META-
COGNITIVE
KNOWLEDGE
Key
Objective 1 = Select sources of information related to writing a report on a famous person in American history.
Objective 2 = Select infonnation abeut a famolls person in American history that is relevant to the purposes of students' written and
oral reports.
Objective 3 = Write infonnative text that cornmunicates to classmates and other appropriate audiences in the schaal important aspects
of the life Di a famolls person in American history and that includes students' opinions of how the famous American' s contributions 1m-
pacted society.
Objective 4 = Deliver a talk to the class about a portion of the written reporto
Assess Inl, In2, and In3 refer to three separate informal assessments; assess Fl (written report) and F2 (oral presentation) refer to the two
formal assessments.
Note: As discussed in the text, activities related to Lessons 5-8 and 15 are not analyzed in tenns of the Taxonomy Table.
Dark shading indicates the strongest alignment-an objective, an instructional activity, and an assessment are all present in the same
cell. Lighter shading indicates two of the three are present.
Chapter 13 Report Writing Vignette 225
and 16. Apparently, many students had not located a sufficient number of ap-
propriate SOUIces.
About halfway through the unit (Lessons 17-20), the emphasis shifted to
fue more complex objectives: evaluate [based onl conceptual knowledge, and cre-
ate [based onlIactual and conceptual knowledge. The format for fuese lessons was
a "Writers' Workshop." Students worked on fueir written reports and critiqued
fue draft reports of ofuer students.
Finally, the last ten days of the unit were given over to the oral presenta-
tions. Students had a set of rating scales to use in planning their oral presenta-
tions (see Attachment B). Planning is a cognitive process in fue category Create;
the rating scales represent criteria (Conceptual knowledge). Additionally, how-
ever, fue students possess Factual knowledge about fue famous Americans they
have studied, which is organized around fue themes fuey have identified (Con-
ceptual knowledge). Thus, we classify fuis two-week-long activity as create [based
onlfactual and conceptual knowledge.
THE ASSESSMENT qUEsTION
Both formal and informal assessments were used. As showll in Table 13.3, fue
informal assessments tapped sorne combination of analyze conceptual knowledge
and apply procedural knowledge. It is interesting that analyzing conceptual knowl-
edge was an integral part of fue Procedural knowledge students were taught to ap-
ply. In this case, fuen, one objective (analyze conceptual knowledge) is embedded
within the ofuer (apply procedural knowledge). Table 13.3 shows that fue informal
assessments provided information to fue teacher about student progress on fue
first two objectives.
In contrast wifu fue informal assessments, fue formal assessments focused
on the second two objectives. What is interesting, however, is fue use of fairly
generic rating scales and scoring rubrics to assess Objectives 3 and 4. What
gets lost in the generic approach is the specific criteria embedded within fue
statement of the objectives (e.g., "how fue famous American's contributions
impacted society" in Objective 3 and "essential information pertaining to fue
segment of fue famous person' s life the student has elected to share" in
Objective 4).
THE ALIGNMENT qUEsTION
Table 13.3 provides the information we need to address the alignment ques-
tion. In fact, sorne of the alignment issues were eifuer addressed or alluded to
in our discussion of the previous questions. In our lreatment of the inslruction
question, for example, we mentioned that the initial activities provided stu-
dents with a general overview of fue unit. It is not surprising, then, fuat they
are not aligned wifu any of fue specific objectives or wifu fue assessments. Sim-
ilarly, in our discussion of fue assessment question, we noted that the informal
226 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
assessments are aligned with the first two objectives, whereas the formal as-
sessments are aligned with the last two objectives.
Strong aligrunent is evident in cells A6 (create [based on)factual knowledge),
B4 (analyze [based on) conceptual knowledge), and B6 (create [based on] conceptual
knowledge). Each of these three cells has at least one entry from fue objectives,
the instructional activities, and the assessments. In contrast, the major mis-
alignment seems to be in ceU C3 (apply procedural knowledge) and, particularly,
cell B5 (evaluate [based on] conceptual knowledge). But, while ceU C3 contains
nine lessons of activities, no explicit objective, and two informal assessments
as noted aboye, it is integraUy related to cell B4. Similarly, ceU B5 relates to five
lessons, has no explicit objective and no assessments, eifuer informal or formal,
but is linked to the activities in ceU A6 and ceU B6.
Chapter 13 Report Writing Vignette 227
knowledge. The rating scales and scoring rubrics inelude criteria relevant to
only knowledge of evaluation criteria, not knowledge of the content cate-
gories. Do the fuemes have a uníty to fuem? Do fue titles accurately and
appropriately represent the underlying information? How important is it
for rating scales and scoring rubrics to inelude at least some criteria rele-
vant to fuis second type of Conceptual knowledge-knowledge of principies
and generalizations?
PART S: CLOSING QUESTIONS
As with fue analysis of aU our vignettes, we were left with a few unanswered
questions. We raise two of fue most important in fuis closing section.
1. What can be done to improve the learning of Procedural knowledge that
involves more complex cognitive processes? One of fue major emphases
in fuis unít is getting students to follow a three-step procedure in moving
from "raw information" to information lhat is organized for the purpose
of writing a reporto The procedure is taking notes, organizing fue notes
around topies or fuemes, and then naming the fueme. Taking notes in-
volves differentiating relevant parts of fue material from irrelevant parts.
Organizing involves determining how the elements (e.g., notes) fit within a
structure. Thus, two of the three steps involve cognitive processes associ-
ated wifu Analyze. At several points in her discussion, Ms. Vandie sug-
gested that students were having difficulty applying fue procedure. Based
on our analysis, fue difficulty most likely resides with Analyze rather than
Apply. What can be done to help students develop fue cognitive processes
they need to successfuUy apply procedural knowledge?
2. In assessing objedives fuat fit within the process calegory Crea te, how
important is it lo have evaluation criteria spedfic to the content knowl-
edge component of the objective? We mentioned earlier that the rating
scales and scoring rubrics inelude fairly general criteria. Students would
likely benefit from knowledge of fuese criteria as fuey work on fueir writ-
ten reports or oral presentations. Within our framework, knowledge of cri-
teria used to evaluate is Conceptual knowledge. Knowledge of evaluation
criteria should not be confused with knowledge of criteria for determining
when to use appropriate procedures, which is a component of Procedural
knowledge (see page 54). Yet anofuer type of Conceptual knowledge is rele-
vant here. In organizing fue information gleaned from reading about fue
famous Americans, the students placed fue relevant information in cate-
gories caUed themes. Knowledge of these categories is also Conceptual
ATTACHMENT A
BRANDYWINE SCHOOL DISTRICT
INTERMEDIATE WRITING CRITERIA
ATTACHMENT B SPEAKING
Student Name Assessment Context(s)
Directíons: Rate the student's speaking skills by assigning a seore of 1-4 on ea eh criterio n listed below.
Record any additional comments at the bottom of the page.
$ -" c.
E
8
.,; '" ~
w ro
u
... ·0 '" U ~
i5 u w
:z:
." >
~
U ¡: ,9- o
~ ~
~
e btl
'" >- ill ro
o E '" '"
;;:: '" w
~ .~ 13
~
-
-~Q:; ._>
O O"'''' ro ro
ro .9 ]
c'
~
O cii...2
z 'B ¿
~ '"
-6 .~
¡: e ro
. " N
~
0-= e
.~
o .!:
'" u
Z e e :02 ar~
.- O
.. e u ~..c CL1
lO ro ro ~C1I"'C
'" w '" ~~ e
O ¡¡; e w ~ ro
ro "" t aJ
:::J CLI_...:
-", 5 J;;! ""C
'" - e'" w
0.8 O u E o
~
'" w ~
" o
ro
> ".¡:¡ vi
~
.§-ij
E'
~ >
w
'" ~
'" o
~
w 't
-'" ro
E ro
~ '"
~
~ :li
Q.I ~ vi
~
<11 .- -e
-.!::!
-= ~ cu
D-6 D "C~ ro ro
ro
c'
'B e " ro
~ ." e
~
'" ili
o . "'''' i!'
~
e e ro w
.- W
~~
e e 7ii ~
ro ro
w'" 1V~
¡¡; e '" ro
~ ro >-CE
:;
-.¡;< ~
0.8
D~
~
Needs
Speaking Skills to Improve Fair Good Excellent
looks at audience while speaking 1 2 3 4
Maintains good posture 1 2 3 4
Speaks clearly 1 2 3 4
Varies tone and volume appropriately 1 2 3 4
Pronounces words clearly 1 2 3 4
Uses pauses and gestures effectively 1 2 3 4
Does not fidget while speaking 1 2 3 4
Avoids hesitation (e.g., "uh," "er") 1 2 3 4
Speaks in turn 1 2 3 4
Speaks for a specifie purpose:
to inform 1 2 3 4
to entertain 1 2 3 4
to give directions 1 2 3 4
to persuade 1 2 3 4
to express personal feelings and opinions 1 2 3 4
Oral Composition Strategies
Chooses appropriate topies and material 1 2 3 4
Prepares presentation effectively 1 2 3 4
Organizes information in an effective way 1 2 3 4
Uses visual aids appropriately 1 2 3 4
Achieves purpose of presentation 1 2 3 4
Uses appropriate vocabulary 1 2 3 4
Adapts speaking to purpose and audience 1 2 3 4
Expresses self effectively 1 2 3 4
Comments
.... -'"
.jii ro
w ~ -'"
'" ~ ro
u i!' ~
'" ro ~
." ~,; -'" ti
w w
5l- .jii e
.~~
w w .~
> "'c. '" ~
ro >-
>-
~ :; :; w
~
- - cE
O O
O .9
.~
~
...
N
ATTACHMENT C REVISION ANO EOITING CHECKLIST
__ Did I write about the topie?
_ _ Did I stay on the topie that I was told to write about?
_ _ Did I use details in my writing?
ATTACHMENT D PRIMARY TRAIT SCORING: REPORT WRITING
Name: _~
Date: _________ _
__________ _
Possible Points:
4 = Always
3 = Usually
2 = Sometimes
1 = Seldom
O = Never
Scoring:
Content:
40-37 = excellent
36-34 = good
33-31 = average
30-28 = needs improvement
27--0 = unsatisfactory
Form:
48--45 = excellent
44-41 = good
40-37 = average
36-34 = needs improvement
33--0 = unsatisfactory
--Did I give examples or ideas for my details?
_ _ Did I organize my writing?
--Did I write so that my ideas are c1ear to other people?
--Did I choose words carefully to express what I want to say?
_ _ Did I use complete sentences?
__ Did I use correct spelling, grammar, capitalization, and
punctuation?
Content:
1. 15 the topic focused or narrowed?
2. Will the audience be interested in the report?
3. 15 the report organized (introduction, body, conclusion)?
4. Does the introduction reveal the main idea of the report?
5. Are the facts in the body relevant to the topie?
6. Does the ending summarize, solve the problem, or answer
the questions?
7. 15 the writer's voiee evident?
8. Does the report make sen se?
9. Is there evidence of research (sources cited, interviews)?
10. Are experiences or prior knowledge of the writer included?
Total
"Revision and Editing Checklist" from Delaware Department of Education. Copyright © Delaware
Department of Education. Reprinted with permission.
230
1. Does the report have a title?
2. Is the first line of each paragraph indented?
3. Is every verb form correct?
4. Is every pronoun used correctly?
5. Do all important words in the title begin with capitalletters?
6. Does each sentence begin with a capitalletter?
7. Does every proper noun begin with a capital?
8. Does each sentence end with the correct end mark?
9. Are there punctuation marks where they are needed?
10. Is every word spelled correctly?
11. Is the corred format followed?
12. Are graphie aids included? (if appropriate, if not appropriate
rate 4) Total
231
CHAPTER 14
Addressing Long-standing
Problems in Classroom Instruction
We believe our revised Taxonomy can contribute usefully to the discussion of
the four fundamental questions we raised in Chapter 1:
o What is important for students to learn in light of the lirnited school
and classroom time available? (the learning question)
o How does one plan and deliver inslruction that will result in high
levels of learning for students? (the instruction question)
o How does one select or design assessment inslruments and procedures
that provide accurate inforrnation about how well students are learn-
ing? (the assessment question)
• How does ane ensure that objectives, instruction, and assessment are
consistent with one another? (the alignrnent question)
At the end of each of our six vignettes, we briefly addressed each of these
four questions. Our analyses of the entire set of vignettes, coupled with a great
deal of discussion at our meetings over the past several years, have led us to
a set of generalizations that relate to these four questions. In this chapter we
focus on nine of these generalizations.
Two of our generalizations are related to the learning question.
o Transfer and retention are important goals of inslruction. The more
complex cogrútive processes are useful in this regard. They transfer to other
contexts from the one in which they are learned; once developed, they are
retained in memory for farrly long periods of time. They also can be used as
activities to facilitate mastery of educational objectives that include the less
complex cogrútive processes. In this latter case, complex cogrútive process
learning is a means to an end, rather than an end in itself.
o Just as there are different cogrútive processes, there are different types
of knowledge. Together knowledge and cognitive processes define what stu-
dents actually learn. The choice of a type of knowledge often suggests the
232
Chapler 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Classroom Instruction 233
accompanying cogrútive process(es). Sirnilarly, the choice of a cogrútive
process often suggests an accompanying types of knowledge.
Two of the generalizations are related to the inslruction question.
o Certain types of knowledge regularly accompany certain cogrútive
processes. Specifically, Remember and Factual knowledge, Understand and Con-
ceptual knowledge, and Apply and Procedural knowledge are often associated. Un-
derstanding and acting on these connections should enable teachers to belter
plan and deliver more effective instruction.
o Failing to differentiate inslructional activities from educational objec-
tives can have a negative impact on student learning. When the focus is placed
on activities, students may be more interested in perforrning the activity than
in learning from the activity. For experience to be an important teacher, stu-
dents must learn from their experiences.
Two generalizations relate to the assessment question.
o Assessment serves a variety of purposes, of which ·two are primary:
to improve student learning (formative assessment) and to assign grades to
students that reflect degrees of learning (surnrnative assessment). Both are
important and useful for improving instruction and learning.
o External assessments (e.g., statewide tests, district scoring guidelines)
affect classroom inslruction in ways that are both positive and negative. Teach-
ers need to find ways of incorporating these external assessments into class-
room instruction that are positive and conslructive.
Finally, three of our generalizations are related to the alignrnent question.
o If assessments are not aligned with objectives, then they do not provide
clear evidence of intended student learning. Teachers should make sure that
assessments are aligned with objectives.
o If inslructional activities are not aligned with assessment, then the as-
sessment results may underestimate the effectiveness of instruction. A teacher
may be teaching superbly and students may be learning equally superbly, but
nonaligned assessments do not capture evidence of that learning. Students are
not learning things that will heíp them on the assessments. Indeed, students
may be taught it is more important to learn what will be assessed than what
goes on in the classroom.
o If instructional activities are not aligned with objectives, then students
may be actively engaged in the activities but may not achieve the intended
learning results. Objectives give purpose to inslructional activities.
In the sections that follow, we discuss each generalization in sorne detail.
For each generalization the organization of our discussion is essentially the
same. We begin by grounding each generalization in teaching practice using
234 Section ID The Taxonorny in Use
examples from Ihe vignettes. We Ihen indica te why Ihe generalization is impor-
tant for teachers. Finally, we suggest the value of Ihe Taxonomy Table in using
Ihe knowledge included in Ihe generalization.
GENERALIZATIONS RELATED TO THE LEARNING QUESTION
USING COMPLEX PROCESSES TO FACILlTATE MASTERY OF SIMPLER OBJECTIVES
In Ihe Parliamentary Acts vignette (Chapler 11), Ihe teacher chose lo incorpo-
rate persuasive writing into a unit on the effects of King George's taxes on
American colonisls in Ihe 1760s and 17705. Why would she choose to do that?
She believed that students would better understand the effects of the taxes if
they placed Ihemselves in Ihe historical context by writing a persuasive editor-
ial from Ihe point of view of eilher a Patriot or a Tory. In addition to requiring
the Conceptual and Procedural knowledge associated with persuasive writing,
writing the editorial required students to Analyze, Evaluate, and Create based on
the material contained in the unit. The activilies that involved more complex
pracess categories were not intended to be objectives, however. Rather, they
were means by which students would more likely attain Ihe primary unit ob-
jective-understand Ihe eHects of King George's taxes on the American
colonists. In olher words, Analyze, Evaluate, and Create activities were intended
to increase students' Understanding.
The other vignettes contain similar examples. The focal point in Ihe Volca-
noes? Here? vignette (Chapter 12) was "conceptual restructuring and meaning-
ful leaming." The unit began wilh Ihe teacher having students draw pictures
of a volcano. Inherent in these pictures were students' initial conceptions of
volcanoes. The teacher hoped that after reading various texts, examining a va-
riety of data, and engaging in discussions with other students, students would
modify Iheir initial conceptions to conform more closely to Ihe actual struclure
of volcanoes. Furlhermore, Ihis "conceptual restructuring" would enable stu-
dents to address Ihe probability of a voleano accumng in their cornmunity and
to write a letter to Ihe County Commissioner offering Iheir recommendations
on funding Ihe proposed evacuation plan. The primary task of Ihe unit, then,
required students to Analyze (e.g., perform data analysis), Evaluate (e.g., judge
how consistent Iheir initial drawings were wilh the newly acquired informa- "
tion), and Create (e.g., combine information derived from multiple sources).
Once again, however, Ihe use of these more complex processes in instructionaJ
activities did not change the nature of Ihe primary unit objective, understanding
conceptual knowledge.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF USING COMPLEX PROCESS CATEGORIES
Whereas Remember, Understand, and Apply are often tied to specific types of
knowledge, Analyze, Evaluate, and Create tend to be more generalizable eog-
nitive pracess eategories. That is, they tend to be used with and on the full
Chapter 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in e1.ssroom lnstruction 2311
variety of knowledge types. As activities, they also can be used to facilitate
Remembering, Understanding, and Applying. The vignettes contam examples of
these various uses. .
Using the more eomplex cognitive proeesses in leaming is nol a new Idea.
In Ihe original Handbook Ihe aulhors wrole aboul evaluation (our Evaluate):
Allhough evaluation is plaeed lasl in the eognitive domain ~ecause it
is regarded as requiring to sorne extent all Ihe olher eategones of be-
havior it is not neeessarily Ihe last step in thinking or problem solv-
ing. It 'is quite possible Ihat Ihe evaluative process will in sorne cases
be Ihe prelude lO the acquisition of new knowledge, a new attempt at
eomprehension or applieation, or a new analysis and synlhes15.
(Bloom et al., 1956, p. 185)
We believe Ihe same reasoning applies lo Analyze and Create.
Furthermore, because of Ihe wide applicability of Ihese m. ore eomplex cog-
nitive proeesses, they hold the keys to the transfer oí leammg and problem
solving. This is not to suggest Ihat Ihe trarlSfer of leaming an.d problem so~vmg
are "knowledge free." Ralher, we suggest Ihat students are mcreasmgly hk~ly
to make eormeetions between and among elements of knowledge when activI-
ties are used Ihal involve more complex pracesses sueh as Analyze, Evaluate,
and Create.
One way of directly teaching Ihe more eomplex, generalizable process cat-
egories is to ineorporale Ihem into students' Metacogmttve knowledge. As we
mentioned in Chapter 4, Metacognitive knowledge is more strategl~ than t~e
other types of knowledge. At fue heart of MetacogniHvekn~ledge he analytic
strategies, evaluative strategies, and creative strategles. lnillally, Ihese strate-
gies may need to be imposed extemally, Ihat is, directly taughtby teachers. Ex-
temally imposed strategies are inherent in Ihe seormg ru~ne. m Ihe Volcanoes
vignette, Ihe scoring guide in the Nutrition vignette, th~ d15tríct wnting , gwde-
lines in the Parliamentary Acts vignette, and Ihe chart m the Macbeth vlgnette
(Chapter 9). To facilitale Ihe strategies becoming MetacogmtlVe knowle~ge, t~achers
should help students refleet on Ihese strategies and their relationshlp to
Iheir leaming in general. Then, to !he extent Ihat Ihese strategies are . abstracted
and learned by the student, Ihey become part of his or her Metacogmtzve knowl-
edgebase. The chart in the Macbeth vignette is a noteworlhy ex~~ple of a form.that
may be used as Ihe basis for a discussion intended t~ faelhtate metaeogrullve
leaming. Stripped of Ihe specifie instructional m~tenal, Ihe left-hand eolurnn
of the table contains the criteria on which eompansons are to be made. The top
row eontains 'the objects to be eompared (in this case, video produehons of
Macbeth). This same format can be used with aImost any obJects and compara-
tive criteria. . .
We emphasize !hat learning extemally im~osed str~teg:tes reqUlres a gre~t
deal of time and many opportunities for praehe.e. In this regard, Mr. Parker s
comment in Ihe Voleanoes vignette Ihat he was mterested m helpmg students
í
236 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
"develop Ihe habit of comparing Iheir responses and those of Iheir ela55mate5
to Ihe available evidénce" is noteworthy.
THE VALUE OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE The value of Ihe Taxonomy
Table goes well beyond making us aware of the possibility and desirability of
ineluding more eomplex cognitive process categories in classroom instruction.
The two-dimensional format of the table makes it elear that more complex
proeess categories either may be taught direetly as the basis of aehieving
"higher-order" objectives or may be used as activities by teachers to facilitate
student learning of objectives that embody less complex process categories.
The multiple uses of more complex cognitive processes give teachers addi-
tional tools in Iheir teaching repertoire.
In addition, the Taxonomy Table points to the necessity of considering
complex cognitive processes in terms of knowledge. Although we have had to
talk about cognitive processe5 wilhout reference to an accompanying type of
knowledge, in our framework, complex processes are never taught as ends in
themselves. To become "ends," they must be combined with sorne type of
knowledge to form an objective.
Finally, because aH of the cells in the Taxonomy Table offer possible an-
swers to that most fundamental of all curriculum questions "What's worth
learning?" the Taxonomy Table encourages educators to consider educational
possibilities rather than to be channeled constantly within the constraints of
school and elassroom life.
CHOOSING VARIETIES OF KNOWLEDGE
The vignettes illustrate the four major types of knowledge that students may
be expeeted to acquire or construct. In the Nutrition vignette (Chapter 8), stu-
dents were expeeted to leam the names of six "appeals" used by designers of
commercials. In the Vo!canoes vignette (Chapter 12), sludents were to remem-
ber Ihat "igneous rocks are critica! evidence for volcanism." In the Parliamen-
tary Acts vignette (Chapter 11), sludents were expected to know the specifics
of the Sugar Aet, the Stamp Act, and Ihe Townshend Act. In the Macbeth vi-
gnette (Chapter 9), sludents were expected to remember important details of
the play (e.g., what Macbeth thinks he sees before Duncan's murder). In the
Addition Faets vignette (Chapter 10), students were to leam Iheir addition faets
with sums tluough 18. Finally, in the Report Writing vignette (Chapter 13), stu-
dents were to leam details about famous Americans. These are aH instanees of
Factual knowledge.
The vignettes also emphasize Conceptual knowledge. In the Nutrition vi-
gnette, each appeal (e.g., to love and admiration, to comfort and pleasure) is, in
reality, a category of appea!s. Wilhin eaeh eategory are a variety of instanees
and examples. The category is defined by common attributes that define Ihe
Chapter 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Classroom lnstruetion 237
rules of inclusion and exclusion (e.g., What makesa specific appeal an appeal
to love and admiration? How does an appeal to love and admiration differ
from an appea! to eomfort and pleasure?). In addition to naming Ihe appeals
(which is Facf:wl knuwledge), Conceptual knowledge requires Ihat sludents know,
at a minimum, Ihe underlying category. Following are other examples of Con-
ceptual knowledge in the vignettes:
• Igneous rocks and Ihe theory of plate tectonics (Voleanoes vignette)
• Patriots and Tories (Parliamentary Acts vignette)
• Tragie hero, motif, and irony (Milcbeth vignette)
• Additive inverse and commutative property-Ihough not by these names
(Addition Facts vignette)
• Themes (Report Writing vignette)
Most of these examples are self-explanatory; however, a cornment on the
cornmutative property and Ihe Iheory of plate tectonics is in order. Properties
and theories contain multiple concepts. The cornmutative property ineludes
Ihe concepts of "order" and "equality." Concepts associated wilh Ihe theory of
plate tectonics include 11 continental draft,"- "lithosphere," 11 asthenosphere,"
"faults," "earthquakes," and "volcanoes." Thus, principIes and th.eories are
built upon eoncepts and Iheir relationships.
The vignettes also inelude Procedural knowledge. The Frocedural knowledge in
Ihe Parliamentary Acts vignette pertains to how to write a persuasive editorial.
It is important to note that a sludent can possess Conceptual knowledge of per-
suasive writing and yet not be ab!e to write persuasively (Le., he or she lacks
Frocedural knowledge). The following are examples of Frocedural knowledge in Ihe
other vignettes:
• Knowing how to use geologic maps to determine Ihe age of rocks
(Volcanoes vignette)
• Knowing how to use !he "make-a-ten" technique (Addition Facts vignette)
• Knowing how to design a commercial (Nutrition vignette) and
• Knowing how to complete 'a retrieva! char! (Milcbeth vignette)
Finally, the vignettes contain Metacognitive knuwledge (although it appears
less frequently than Ihe other tluee types of knowledge). In the Volcanoes vi-
gnette, Metacognitive knowledge is inherent in Ihe criteria that students are ex-
pected to use to check their progress in completing their assignments properly
(Le., accuraey, consistency with Ihe evidence, acknowledgment of altemative
explanations, clarity). The teaeher hoped that sludents would leam Ihese crite-
ria and use them Ihroughout the eourse and beyond. These are examples of
Metacognitive knowledge in Ihe olher vignettes:
23B Section JJJ The Taxonomy in Use
• Students examine the impact commercials ha ve on their own decision
making (Nutrition vignette)
• Students check their own editorials before submitting them to the teacher
(Parliamentary Acts vignette)
• Students acquire various memory aids (Addition Pacts vignette)
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF USING DIFFERENT TVPES OF KNOWLEDGE
The differences among the four types of knowledge are far more than semantic.
Evidence indica tes that educators should use different instructional strategies
for teaching different types of knowledge (Anderson, 1995). Factual knowledge is
usually taught through repetition and rehearsal. 1n contrast, sorne kinds of Con-
ceptual knowledge are best taught through the use of positive and negative exam-
pies of the eategories. Teaching Procedural knowledge is often more effective
when visual displays sueh as flow eharts are made available to or developed by
the students. Pinally, Metacognitive knowledge is often taught by means of a
strategic, often self-regulatory emphasis. In addition, Metacognitive knowledge
develops over a lengthy period of time, usually more than a single eourse or
semester.
Switching from the teaehing methods used for one type of knowledge to
those used for another may be useful in helping students develop the more
complex processes. Por example, although teaehing the concepl of persuasive
wntmg may help students undersland it, Ihis underslanding may or may nol
enable them to write persuasively. Teaehing them a procedure for persuasive
writing may be needed before students can apply what they have leamed. Sim-
ilarly, a student may remember a dictionary or textbook definition of irony
(Factual knowledge) but still not undersland the meaning of irony (Conceptual
knowledge).
To ilIustrale this poinl, irony can be defined as "an expression or utteranee
mark~d by a deliber.at~ contrasl between apparent and intended meaning"
(Amencan Herztage D¡ct¡onary of the English Language, 1992). Knowledge of this
string of words constitutes Factual knowledge, whieh a studenl mighl remember.
To h~lp students better understand conceptual knowledge, the teaeher mighl em-
phaslze the defining fealures of irony (e.g., "deliberate opposile" or "contrasl,"
"ap~arent vs. intended meaning") and give examples (e.g., "Even as the Prime
Minisler was urging resislanee lo the influenee of American culture, he was un-
knowingly wearing American jeans"). Teaching irony as a concept, complete
~,.th defining features and positive and negative examples, is more likely lo fa-
Clhlate understanding.
THE VALUE OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE As should be evident from Ihe
preeeding discussion, leachers have a greal deal lo say aboul the type of
knowledge they intend their students lO acquire or work with. Considering the
rows of the Taxonomy Table permits leaehers to make ehoices about the type(s)
Chapter 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Classroom Instruction 238
of knowledge Ihey judge lo be most importan!. These decisions, logether with
the processes involved with the knowledge, enable teaehers lo plan more effee-
tive instruction and assessmen!.
A key issue eonfronting leachers, then, is lo differenliale among the
various Iypes of knowledge and help students aequITe or work wlth the
type of knowledge Ihal most likely will result in Iheir mastery of the targel
objective.
GENERALIZATIONS RELATED TO THE INSTRUCTION QUESTION
REC:OGNIZING LINKS BETWEEN KNOWLEDGE TVPES AND COGNITIVE PROC:ESSES
1n several of the vignettes (partieularly the Volcanoes vignette, but also the
Macbeth vignette, the Addition Pacts vignette, and the Parliamenlary Acts vi-
gnette), Ihere is a parallel relationship between the firsllhree rows of Ihe Tax-
onomy Table (Factual, Conceptual, and Procedural knowledge) and the first three
eolumns (Remember, Understand, and Apply!. Very often Factual knowledge is to
be Remembered, Conceptual knowledge is lO be Understood, and Procedural knowl-
edge is to be Applied. As a consequence, for teaehers who begin their planning
with these parts of the knowledge dimension (e.g., "What faets, concepts, and
procedures should I teaeh my students?"), the associated cognitive processes
readily suggest themselves. .
1n the Addition Paels vignette, for example, the Factual knowledge conslsts
of the addition faets with sums through 18. The related eognitive proeess is
Remember and the objective becomes "Studentswill remember addition faels."
Sirnilarly, in the Macbeth vignette, Conceptual knowledge is emphasized: "t~agic
hero," ucharacter defects," "motif," and "irony." Here the related cognlhve
process is Understand and the objeetive becomes "The students will under-
stand lhe meaning of Macbeth in their own lives" (using the eoneepts of "tragic
hero," IIc haracter defects," IImotif," and "ironyll to make the connechon).
Pinally, in the Volcanoes vignette, students are taught how geologists colleel
and log rock samples and how they use geologic maps to determme the ages
of the roeks they have eolleeled. Henee, the focus is on Procedural knowledge.
It is not a streteh to assume that the teacher wants students to Apply this
Procedural knowledge to the róek samples and geologic maps they are given
in class.
Given evidenee of the frequent pairing of Factual knowledge with Remember,
Conceptual knowledge with Understand, and Procedural knowledge with Apply,
where does this leave Metacognitive knowledge, Analyze, Create, and Evaluate?
There are at leasl 'tWo possible answers lo this question.
The first is that the pairing eontinues; that is, Metacognitive knowledge is as-
sociated with the proeess calegories of Analyze, Evaluate, and Create. Some sup-
port for this possibility comes from our examples of objeetives that inelude
240 Section m The Taxonomy in Use
Metacognitive knowledge. Strategies (e.g., Ihe Volcanoes? Here? and Addition
Facts vignettes) almost always require Ihat students Analyze, Evaluate, and/or
Create. Self:exantination (e.g., Ihe Nutrition vignette), self-expression through
Journal wntmg (e.g., the Macbeth vignette), and monitoring oí one's writing
(e.g., the Parhamentary Acts vignette) likewise require one or more oí these
complex cognitive processes.
There is a second possible answer lO Ihe question oí Ihe pairing oE Ihe more
complex processes with knowledge, one we discussed earlier in lhis chapter.
Ralher Ihan stating Ihese processes explicitly in objectives, teachers use instruc-
tional activities that incorporate or require either Metacognitive knowledge or Ihe
three most complex cognitive processes with Ihe expectation Ihat Ihey will
enable sludents to achieve "Iower-Ievel" objectives. For example, memoriza-
tion strategies are used to help students remember factual knowledge. Similarly,
self-regulation strategies are used to help studenls correctly apply procedural
knawledge.
Although many objectives follow the pairing pattern we have described,
many do not, especially those objectives aimed directly at achieving skills in
Ihe higher-order objectives. In Ihese instances, Analyze, Evaluate, and Create are
linked lo all Ihe kinds of knowledge.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RECOGNIZING THE LINKS BETWEEN KNOWL-
EDGE TVPES AND COGNITIVE PROCESS CATEGORIES H, as we suggest,
many school objectives Eall into three cells of Ihe Taxonomy Table (cells Al, B2,
and C3), this has several implicalions for leachers. Two are discussed in this
section. The fust is similar to a point we made earlier. If a teacher knows Ihal a
specific objective is of the form remember factual knowledge, understand concep-
tual knowledge, or apply procedural knowledge, Ihen the teacher may make sorne
assumptions about how to teach and assess Ihat objective. Consequently, ralher
Ihan starting from seratch, Ihe teacher can ground his or her plans in this prior
knowledge.
If a teacher knows, for example, that an objective is of the form undérstand
conceptual knowledge Ihat relates to a concept dass or calegory, then Ihe teacher
may facililate learning by focusing Ihe sludenls' attention on Ihe dass or cate-
gory's defining attribules and by using examples and nonexamples in leach-
ing. With respect to assessmenl, studenls should be required lo go beyond
memorizalion. They might be asked to differentiale between novel positive
and negative examples or to construct novel examples (i.e., Ihose not induded
in Ihe texl or discussed in dass), explaining why the examples are, in fael, ex-
amples. Note this does not indicate which specific positive and negative exam-
pies lo use in teaching or assessment, but, in this inslance, they do know Ihat
sorne would be helpful.
A second implication of Ihis issue for teachers is Ihe desirability of indud-
ing explicit objectives Ihat Eocus on Metacognitive knowledge in Ihe curriculum.
Although sorne students engage in metacognition on the;r own, not aII stu-
Chapler 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Classroom Instruction 241
denls do. Slating melacognitive objectives, Ihereíore, lends lo level Ihe playing
field. AlI studenls are expected lO use melacognilive knowledge lo enhance
Iheir learning.
In general, Metacognitive knowledge is parl of whal sociologisls have re-
ferred lo as the "latenl curriculum" (Dreeben, 1968). Now il may be lime lo
make Metacognitive knowledge manifesl. One imporlanl resull of this change
would be Ihe shift from teacher aulhority in teaching to studenl empowermenl
in leaming. Metacognitive knowledge enables studenls lo learn lo lake grealer
conlrol oí their own learning; teachers become facililalors of leaming rather
than dispensers of knowledge.
THE VALUE OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE The Taxoriomy Table is a useful
framework for analyzing a unit or course Ihal is currently being taughl or
íor planning a unit or course that will be laught in Ihe future. In Ihe firsl case,
Ihe analysis permits teachers to delennine which types oí objectives (lhal
is, cells oí Ihe lable) are emphasized, which are merely "menlioned," and which
are omitted. This analysis may lead to eilher general satisfaction wilh Ihe "slate
oí affairs" or recognition oí Ihe needto modify Ihe course or unit (e.g., Ihe need
to achieve a more appropriate balance amóng types oí objectives).
Emply cells in Ihe lable may be viewed as "missed opportunities."
Whelher a leacher wishes lo take advantage oí Ihese missed opportunities de-
pends in large par! on which ceIls are empty. If Ihe overall goal oí Ihe teacher is
relention oí knowledge (see Chapter 5) and there are numerous empty cells in
the Remember column, then this missed opportunity needs attention paid lo it.
Similarly, if Ihe overall goal oE Ihe leacher is transíer oí knowledge to fields
other Ihan Ihose in which il was learned (agairi, see Chapter 5) and there are
numerous empty cells in \he columns to Ihe righl oí Remember, Ihen Ihe leacher
has a problem.
In Ihe second case, \he Taxonomy Table permits leachers to develop a unit
or course Ihat most dosely reflects the philosophy oí a teacher, a group of
teachers (e.g., department, grade level), or sorne larger unit (e.g., community,
school board). The aulhors of the original Handbook suggested Ihat the Taxon-
omy was "value-íree" (Bloomet al., 1956, p. 14). In this regard, Ihe Taxonomy
is perhaps best viewed as a conceptual framework lhat can be used within vir-
lually any philosophical framework. We endorse this position, while recogniz-
ing al Ihe same time that a great deal of curriculum discussion and work take
place in Ihe arena of values (Sosniak, 1994). In this regard, Ihe Taxonomy Table
is best seen as aiding the necessary transition from curriculum to instruchon.
The Taxonomy Table does not define curriculum; only peop!e can do thal. In
Dewey's (1916) words, "Educalion as such has no aims; only persons, parents,
teachers, etc., have airns" (p. 107). Rather, Ihe Taxonomy Table helps "sort out"
\he complexities oí Ihe curriculum once it has been decided upon so lhat teach-
ing is more likely to be successíu! and assessment is more likely lo be appro-
priate and useíul.
242 Section m The Taxonorny in Use
DIFFERENTIATING INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES FROM OB.JECTIVES
Teacher educators and ac\rrtinistrators who are responsible for supervising prac-
ticmg teachers have long been impatient with teachers who fail to differentiate
activities from objectives. Imagine this conversation between two teachers.
Teacher #1: My students are learning how dominant and recessive
genes explain the differential inheritance 01 sorne charac-
teristics in brothers and sisters. What objectives are you
addressing in dass today?
Teacher #2: My students are going on a field trip to the zoo.
Teacher #1: Good, but going to the zoo is an activity. Is there an objec-
tive far the lesson?
Teacher #2: That's it. Our objective is to visit the zoo!
As we ernphasized in Chapter 2, objectives are statements that describe the
desired results or "ends" of the instructional process. When we ask, "In which
activities should students be engaged?" we are concerned with rneans. When we
ask, "What should students learn from their involvement in these activities?" we
are concerned with ends. 1n om hypothetical example, the real question in terms
of objectives is "What are the students expected to learn from their visit to the
zoo?"
Numerous activities are induded in the vignettes. Here are sorne examples:
• Creating a word bank, watchlng a videotape (Volcanoes vignette)
• Reviewing the editorial checklist; taking a quiz (Parliamentary Acts vignette)
• Writing scene-by-scene synopses; working in groups on motifs (Macbeth
vignette)
• Engaging in "fact friends" and "fact family" activities; participating in the
relay race (Addition Facts vignette)
• Discussing popular cornmercials; videotaping students' original cornmer-
dais (Nutrition vignette)
• Selecting sources of information (Report Writing vignette)
Notice that each of these activities can serve rnultiple learning ends. Stu-
dents can "create a word bank" in order to memorize the words in the bank or
to develop a conceptual framework for understanding the unit material. Stu-
dents can review an editorial checklist to understand the criteria used to judge
the quality of editorials or to learn how to write editorials of high quality.
1n addition to cognitive "ends," activities may have intended purposes in
the affective and/or behavioral realms. The decision to "playa videotape" may
be made on the basis 01 a concern for students' interests. The teacher may be-
heve that the videotape will be more interesting than Iecturing students on the
Chapter 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Oassroom lnstruction 243
same material. Similarly, the use of a relay race in second-grade arithmetic may
reflect the need as perceived by the teacher for children in this age group to
move around periodically in the dassroom.
Although there is a link between instructional activities and educational
objectives, the strength of that link varies with the specificity of the objective.
For example, an objective is for students to "recall addition facts to 18 without
manipulatives" in the Addition Facts vignette. For many teachers, recallsug-
gests that the instructional activities willlikely involve repetition, redundancy,
and perhaps memorization strategies. This is as far as the link goes, however.
From there the ingenuity of the teacher takes over, as witnessed by the vi-
gnette's "Great Addition Wall Chart," "pocket facts," "Mad Math Minutes,"
"fact friends," "iad families,u "houses with attics/' Uten·frames," and relay
race game.
Without teachers' ingenuity, objectives that are very specific can lead
to tight links among the objective, instructional activities, and assessment
tasks. The link may be so tight, in fact, that it is extremely difficult to differ-
entiate objectives from assessment tasks, and assessment lasks from in-
structional activities. Thus, the teacher could use each studen!'s success in the
relay race as an assessment as well as an instructional activity. The vignettes
contain several activities that serve as both assessments and instructional
activities.
1n contrast, consider the objective that students willlearn to analyze po-
ems. It is much more difficult to predict what the instruction will involve, and
the link between objective and instructional activity is loaser. Teachers may use
many means to teach this objective to students. Sirnilarly , the nature of assess-
ment of this objective will vary among teachers. Consequently, teachers have
great latitude in determining appropriate activities for teachlng and assessing
this objective.
One can ponder why sorne teachers frame their objectives as activities. We
suggest at least three possible explanations. The fust is that with the current
emphasis on performance assessment, teachers may see the performances as
the objectives. Teachers therefore write as their objectives "to write a letter to
Congress," Uto conduct an experiment," lito give a demonstration," "to wríte
informative text," and "to deliver a talk." These are activities, however. If the
students were taught how to write an effective letter, how lo conduct a valid
experirnent, how to give a compelling demonstration, how lo write informa-
tive text, and how lo deliver a talk, these would be legitimate objectives with
an emphasis on applying procedural knowledge. The statements of objectives,
then, take the formo "The student willlearn to write an effective letter."
A second explanation for confusing activities and objectives is that activi-
ties, being observable, allow the teacher to assess students' progress toward the
objectives of the unit while the unit is being taught. A comment made by Ms.
Marnie Jackson in discussing the Macbeth vignette is a wonderful illustration
of this point. Ms. Jackson was asked how she determines how well students are
learning whlle she is teaching them. She replied:
244 Section ID The Taxonorny in Use
Chapter 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Dassroom Iostruetion 245
When fue majority of these students get involved with-an aetivity
their facial expressions and body language are eloquent mirrors of
fueir minds. In one discussion of ambilion [an activity], for example,
most students said iniliaUy fuat ambilion was a positive attribute. 1
asked fuem, "Could it ever be abad quality in an individual personal-
ity?" I eould almost see the wheels turning as they proeessed this in-
formalion. Then, as a revised eoneept of ambilion began to form in
fueir rninds, one student said, "WeU yeah! U it's too much." The stu-
dent fuen glaneed around the room at his or her peers, looking for val-
idalion. Anofuer student chimed in, "Like J. R. Ewing of Dallas!" Nods
of assent and seaUered "Yeahs" around fue room foUowed. Oeeasions
sueh as this gel me as energized as fuey do the students; when exist-
ing coneepts are stretched or enriched wifu new data [the objective].
In cases like this, the activity is seen as a "proxy" for fue objeetive. Perhaps
giving an aetivity as an objeetive is a shorthand notalion. The teaeher is really
saying, "To assess my real objective, 1 will ask students to give a demonstration,
write a leUer to Congress, eonduet an experiment, and so on. By watehing and
listening lo lhem 1 will be able lo determine how well they are progressing wilh respeel
lO my real objeelive." (The italicized words are unspoken.) The eriteria for
judging the suceess of the activity are also implicit. For example, most teachers
do not wanl students to write any old leUer; fuey want fuem to write a formal
leUer or an effective leUer. There are eriteria that define a formalleuer and
an effective leUer (although fue laUer may be somewhat more difficult to
speeify).
A final possible explanation for eonfusing aetivities and objectives is that
there is no differenee between fuem. Sorne teachers are convineed fuat there are
edueational activities (Le., experienees) that have value in fueir own right. Ex-
perts have suggested that education is what is left after we have forgotten all
fue specifics we were taught in school. What do we remember about our school
experienees? We are more likely to remember the trip lo fue zoo or our partici-
pation in a dramatic debate than fue inert knowledge gained during those ae-
tivities (Le., the animals' eating habits, the issue under debate and the argu-
ments made). This final possibility is often associated wifu teachers of the
humanities. Just listening to Brahms, looking at a Picasso, or watehing a per-
formance of The Firebird has value in itself in terms of whal individual stu-
dents' take away from fue experienee.
This seeond question is often greeted wifu a shrug of fue shoulders and a mut-
tered "nothing."
One explanation for fuis differenee is fuat aetivities are observable and can
be recounted seriaUy, whereas leaming is unobservable and hence requires that
inferenees be made. In olher words, although sludents know what they did,
fuey may not know what, if anything, fuey learned by doing it. Reminding stu-
dents of fue links between aetivities and objectives may inerease the likelihood
that fuey make fue proper inferenees about leaming. In addition, understand-
ing this link between aetivities and objeetives may help students see the eon-
neetion between what they do and what fuey leam.
Equally important is ensuring that students know what the objeetive
is and what it means. We believe Ihat meaning is enhaneed by, first, using
verbs and nouns fual are as speeifie as possible in stating fue objeetives and,
second, showing students sample assessment tasks when the objeetive is intro-
duced to fuem. In fuis way, the objeetive becomes more precise and more con-
crete. Simply stated, you are more likely to gel there if you know where you
are going.
THE VALUE OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE Activities provide dues to the
proper plaeement of objectives in fue Taxonomy Table. Beeause aetions (verbs)
can be used to achieve a variety of ends, however, a taxonomie classification
eannot be made based on fue verb alone. For example, a student can write a set
of notes recalled from a lecture (i.e., Remember), can write fue differenees be-
Iween two objects or ideas (Le., Undersland), or can write an original essay on
the value of spirituality in eommunity life (Le., Create). When the verbs used lo
describe aetivities are linked with the verbs associaled wifu proeess categories
as well as wifu fue knowledge dimension, fue purpose of the aetivities (that is,
the intended learning outcomes) becomes elearer.
Furthermore, as illustrated in fue vigneues, the Taxonomy Table provides
an easy way for teachers lo use activities to infer objeetives. Confronted with
an aetivity, teachers have to answer only one basic question: "What do [ expeet
my students to leam as a result of participating in (or completing) this aetiv-
ity?" The answer lo this question is quite frequently fue objective.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF DIFFERENTIATING ACTIVITIES FROM OB.JEC-
TIVES The distinetion between activities and objeetives is important. Undue
emphasis is often placed on the suceess of the teaehing-Iearning aetivities
(means) rather fuan sueeess in terms of student learning (ends). This point
was well made by Jaekson (1968) in his now classic Lije in Classrooms. Students
are able to answer the question "What did you do in school today?" They often
struggle, however, with the question "What did you leam in sehool today?"
GENERALIZATIONS RELATED TO THE ASSES!:;MENT QUESTION
U51NG SUMMATIVE AND FORMATIVE A,SSESSMENTS
Teachers assess students for two basie reasons: (1) to monitor sludent leaming
and make necessary adjustments in instruction, both for individual students
and for entire elasses, and (2) to assign grades to sludents following sorne pe-
riod of instruclion. The former type of assessment is ealled formative beca use
its primary function is to help "form" leaming while there is still time and op-
portunity for students to improve. The laUer type is caUed summative because
246 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
its primary function is to "sum up" student learning at the end of sorne period
of time (Scriven, 1967).
Although the interpretation of the assessment and the use to which it
is put classify assessment as formative or summative, in practice there is
another difference. Formative assessment is usually more informal, based on
a variety of information sources (e.g., classroom questions, observations of
students, homework, and quizzes). Surnmative evaluation, in contrast, is usu-
ally more formal, based on more focused information sources (e.g., tests, proj-
ects, and term papers). The reliance on formal means of summative assess-
ment is consistent with the felt need of many teachers to be able to justify or
defend the grades they assign to students. In addition, formal assessment of-
ten makes teachers aware of students whose learning they had underesti-
mated on the basis of classroom interaction. Although the data from informal
assessment, on the other hand, may, or, more likely may not, reach technical
standards, they are timely and therefore far more useful in guiding instruc-
tional adjustments.
Despite these differences, formative and summative assessment are often
intertwined in the classroom. Consider sorne examples from the vignettes. In
the Parliamentary Acts vignette, the summative assessment was an editorial in
which students were to "interpret the [Parliamentary] Acts from the perspec-
tive of a Patriot or Tory character." Students wrote drafts of their editorials; re-
ceived feedback from themselves, their peers, and Ms. Airasian; and were ex-
pected to rewrite their drafts in line with the feedback they received. Two-fifths
of the grade (summative) was based on their completion of this formative
process. In this example, the lines between formative and summative assess-
ment were blurred.
Examples of formative assessment in the Voleanoes? Here? vignette were
the "assessment conversations," held twice during the unit. The fust followed
a homework assignment in which students had to answer four questions on
rock types, igneous rocks, and voleanic activity. The second was a conversation
about students' analysis and interpretation of data pertaining to rocks and vol-
canoes (an in-class assignment). The summative assessment was a letter writ-
ten to the County Commissioner concerning the likelihood of a voleanic erup-
tion affecting the local area. Following a peer assessment session, however, Mr.
Parker gave those students who asked to do so an opportunity to revise their
letters prior to subrnitting them for a grade. Thus, once again the formative and
summative assessments were intertwined. (Emphasized in the summative as-
sessment was the motivation to achieve because the opportunity to revise had
to be requested by the student.)
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF USING FORMATIVE AND SUMMATIVE ASSESS-
MENT Formative assessment provides teachers and students with information
they need as the unit is being taught: for students, how to achieve the objective,
and for teachers, what instructional decisions to make. Should 1 go over this ma-
terial again? Do students need more time to complete their work? Should 1 just
Chapter 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Classroom Instruction 247
skip this session (because it appears too boring or confusing to students)?
Should 1 add a few extra days to this unit? Should 1 plan a small group session
with Bill, Latoya, Jean, and Cad to work on their rnisunderstandings? These are
rather "low stakes" decisions; a wrong decision quickly becomes evident and
can be corrected. In this context, teachers can afford to rely on students' expres-
sions, persistence, responses to oral questions, and responses to a variety of
short written assignments. Virtually every teacher in our vignettes engaged in
formative assessment and relied on such information to guide their instruc-
tional decisions.
Summative assessment provides the data teachers need to make and jus-
tify the grades they assign students. Because these are "high-stakes" decisions
for individual students, the data should have high technical quality. Further-
more, because grading decisions must be not only made but also justified,
teachers may feel more cornfortable relying on faidy traditional tests of Factual
knowledge in summative assessment. The test questions have elear "right" and
"wrong" answers that are easy to defend. Ms. Jackson's final examination in
the Macbeth vignette is a vivid example.
To the extent that formative assessment and summative assessment are
linked in sorne way, students are more likely to do better on the summative as-
sessments. To the extent that formative and summative assessments are virtu-
ally identical (as when summative assessments are used formatively or when a
series of formative assessments replace an independent summative assess-
ment), the distinction between instruction and assessment becomes blurred.
We say more about this later in the chapter.
THE VALUE OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE In general, the Taxonomy Table
is more relevant far summative assessment than far formative assessment. An
exception to this generalization is when summative-like assessments are used
for formative assessment purposes. We noted examples of this exception
aboye, and they are evident in almost all of the vignettes.
In designing summative assessments, teachers can develop prototypical
assessment tasks for each cell of the Taxonomy Table. Statements of Factual
knowledge, for example, often take the form of sentences. Transforrning the sen-
tences into questions becomes the basis for assessing many Factual knowledge
objectives. In the Voleanoes vignette, one important piece of Factual knowledge
is that "igneous rocks are critical evidence for voleanism." Students are ex-
pected to Remember that Factual knowledge. Appropriate assessment questions
include "What kind of rocks are critical evidence for voleanism?" and "Igneous
rocks are critical evidence for what natural phenomenon?" If multiple-choice
items are desired, the teacher can add a homogeneous set of response options
to the questions.
When the emphasis is on remembering factual knowledge, the question is
a verbatim transformation of the sentence. Using synonyms in the transfor-
mation moves the objective from Remember to Understand (e.g., "Magma is
critical evidence for what natural phenomenon?"). To answer this queshon
248 Section lIT The Taxonomy in Use
students need to know that magma is an example of the category of igneous
rocks.
Developing prototypical assessment tasks for objectives that indude more
complex cognitive processes and different types of knowledge is likely to re-
quire more though!. Several examples of assessment tasks for sample objec-
tives for each cognitive process were presented in Chapter 5. Many more mod-
els of items are found in lhe original Handbook, which gave greater emphasis to
assessmen!. Once a set of prototypieal tasks are designed, lhey can serve as for-
mat blueprints for preparing assessments for objectives in particular cells of lhe
Taxonomy Table. In this context, lhe Taxonomy Table serves as a "labor-saving
device" for preparing valid assessments ..
Finally, teachers may place lhe proportion of assessment tasks (e.g., test
items or score points in lhe case of performance assessments) along with the
proportion of time spent on particular instructional activities in lhe appropri-
ate cells of the Taxonomy Table. Assuming lhat these two proportions in each
cell should be roughly lhe same, teachers can judge the instructional validity of
the assessment(s). These proportions should also be the same as the relative
emphasis intended for each objective.
DEALING WITH EXTERNAL ASSESSMENTS
Increasingly teachers are confronted wilh state curriculum standards and cor-
responding state testing programs, and with district core curriculums and cor-
responding district scoring guides for performance assessments. We refer to
lhese testing programs and performance assessment scoring guides as external
assessments because people who typically do not teach in classrooms mandate
lhem. External assessments have flourished over lhe past several years, largely
as a result of more education accountability measures. Generally, lhese assess-
ments are referred to as "high-stakes" assessments beca use critical decisions
about students, teachers, and, increasingly, schools are made based on lheir re-
sults. See, for example, lhe Report Writing vignelte (page 210).
As might be expected, most teachers are less than enamored wilh external
assessments. Consider lhe following lelter to lhe editors of Newsweek magazine:
Kudos for showing how dangerous lhese new standardized tests are.
As a former English teacher who quit ralher lhan "teach for lhe tests,"
I applaud students who refuse to take lhese exams. Education officials
need to find an alternative fast, before our kids grow up with no idea
how to think wilhout a No. 2 pencil and a multiple-choice bubble
sheet. (Ellis, 1999, p. 15)
Many of the teachers who wrote our vignettes struggled with external
assessments. Ms. Jeanna Hoffman (Addition Facts vignette), for example,
gave two reasons for her choice of instructional uni!. Pirst, lhe "unit is part of
the school districes second-grade eore curriculuffi," and second, "addition
facts are included on the currently used standardized tes!." Similarly, Ms.
Chapler 14 Addressing Long-standing Problerns in Classroom Instruction 249
Airasian (Parliamentary Acts vignette) indicated lhat "bolh persuasive writing
and colonial history are required topies in the district's fifth-grade curricu-
lum." In addition, she was expected to use a set of distriet-adopted Focus
Correction Areas (FCAs), four criteria to be applied to all student writing (i.e.,
use complete sentences, write proper paragraphs, use correct spelling, and
write legibly).
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF DEALING WITH EXTERNAL ASSESSMENTS
The signifieance of external assessments stems in large part from the serious-
ness of their consequences for students, teachers, and administrators (i.e., lhe
fact that lheyare "high stakes"). Students may be retained at a particular grade
level for a second or third year or denied a high school diploma. Schools may
be identified publidy as "low performing" or, in Soulh Carolina, "critically im-
paired." In some states, "critically impaired" schools are subject to being
"taken over" by lhe state Board of Education.
A second reason external assessments are significant is !hat lhey are likely
to be around for sorne time. The number of states lhat have enacted sorne form
of accountability legislation has tripled in the pas! several years. In almost all
cases, lhe legislation calls for lhe issuance of school report cards, based in large
part on lhe results of external assessments.
Third, avoiding lhe consequences of high-stakes testing may depend, at least
in part, on finding lhe balance between an appropriate interpretation of what is
required by lhe combination of externally mandated standards wilh lheir accom-
panying assessments and lhe local school's interpretation of what is an appropri-
ate education. External assessments are intended lo be used wilh al! students at
selected grade levels in all schools in a district or state. But, schools do not pro-
vide identical curriculums or instruction (despite efforts to ensure they do).
Therefore, lhe assessments will belter fit lhe instruction received by certain stu-
dents and in some schools !han olhers. Consequently, it is quite possible lhat as-
sessment results reflect differences in lhe interpretation of the standards and
lherefore lhe validity of the assessments. Finding a balance lhat meets both ex-
ternal mandated standards and local preferences will be increasingly important.
Simply stated, external assessments have become a way of life for students,
teachers, and administrators. Ralher lhan "rage against lhe dying of lhe light,"
it seems more reasonable to adopt lhe stance of a second teacher who sent a let-
ter to Newsweek:
The challenge for teachers of lhe 21st century is to provide mastery of
lhose necessary test-taking skills wilhout losing sight of our deeper
mission. (Halley, 1999, p. 15, emphasis added)
THE YALUE OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE As illustrated in the vignettes,
teachers can use lhe Taxonomy Table to analyze assessments as well as instruc-
tional activities and objectives. Using the Taxonomy Table to analyze external
assessments permits educators to look benealh lhe surface elements of the
2S0 Section lIT The Taxonorny in Use
assessments to infer the deeper levels of student learning being assessed.
Rather than "teach for the tests," teachers can then teach for the learning being
tested.
When confronted by external assessments, teachers should prepare two
Taxonomy Tables: one for the course objectives and the other for the external
assessment. By comparing these two tables, teachers can estimate the extent of
the match between the course objectives and the external assessment. Further-
more, they can note opportunities to link the course objectives with the exter-
nal assessment. Ms. Airasian (Parliamentary Acts vignette) illustrated how this
can be done with scoring rubrics for performance assessments. In evaluating
the students' editorials, Ms. Airasian used two sets of criteria. The first was a
generic set for al1 writing prepared by the school district, and the second was a
set intended specifically for persuasive essays. In combination these two sets
of criteria allowed her to conform to the district' s expectations (i.e., the exter-
nal assessment) while at the same time to incorporate more specific criteria re-
lated to the primary unit objective.
GENERALIZATIONS RELATED TO THE ALlGNMENT qUESTION
ALIGNING ASSESSMENTS WITH OS.lECTIVES
Most of us know a mathematics teacher who says his or her "real" objective is
problem solving but who tests students on factual recall. At the opposite ex-
treme is the history teacher whose objective is stated as remembering "great
men and big events" but who asks students to compose an essay explaining the
role of religious differences in various conflicts. How can this misalignment of
objectives and assessment be explained? The vignettes illustrate at least four
answers to this question.
First, instructional units include complicated sets of events and experi-
ences with twists and turns introduced as exigencies arise during their imple-
mentation. As teachers encounter difficulties teaching the unit, their objectives
may change or their understanding of the previously stated objectives may
change. The end-of-unit assessments may reflect the "new" objectives or
evolved understandings rather than the objectives that were stated at the be-
ginning of the unit.
Second, teachers may not possess a good grasp of their objectives at the be-
ginning of the unit. Consider the language used by teachers who wrote the vi-
gnettes as they described their primary unit objective(s):
• The unit was designed to promote conceptual restructuring and meaning-
fullearning in earth science. (Volcanoes vignette)
• 1 want to integrate students' persuasive writing with their knowledge of
historical persons and events. (Parliamentary Acts vignette)
Chapter 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Classroom Instructiún
2S1
• Students will see the relevance of literary works in their own lives.
(Macbeth vignette)
• It is a unit on teaching strategies for memorizing addition facts that sum to
18 or less. (Addition Facts vignette)
• [Students should learn] to check the influences that commercials have on
their own "senses" and to understand how those influences work on
them. (Nutrition vignette)
As a unit unfolds, the instructional activities make the objectives more con-
crete, which generally results in a greater understanding of the objectives on
the part of the teacher (and, it is hoped, the students as well). Wh~n the time
comes for formal assessment, the concrete understanding provided by the
activities, rather than the abstract understanding inherent in the stated objec-
tives, is more ofien mirrored in the assessment. The mismatch between abstract
and concrete likely corresponds with the misalignment of objectives and
assessment.
Third (and somewhat related to the second), sorne teachers may take a
long-range perspective as they determine their objectives. They may focus on
objectives that will be addressed in multiple units during the school year, with
actual mastery of the objectives expected to occur on1y at the end of a course
(or perhaps after several years of instruction). Teachers may feel it is premature
to assess these long-range objectives afier the completion of a single unit. Pre-
mature assessment may generate results that are technically unsound and,
more important from the teacher' s point of view, discouraging for the students.
Thus, the teacher engages in what may be termed a "partial assessment," as-
sessing only that knowledge and those cognitive processes that have been
JI covered" up to the time the assessment is made. The assessment, then, is far
more specific than the general objective, and misalignment in the general-
specific sense is ofien noted.
Fourth, and consistent with our discussion in the preceding section, the
cause of misalignment may be external to the teacher. Two of the vignettes il-
lustrate this situation. Ms. Airasian (Parliamentary Acts vignette) operated
within the framework of the district writing guidelines. Since, as mentioned
earlier, these writing conventions apply to all writing, they are not as aligned
with the primary unit objective" as conventions developed exclusively for per-
suasive writing would be. Simj.Iarly, it appears that Ms. J ackson' s (Macbeth
vignette) choice of her final examination was made primarily on the basis of
her need to grade students, not her need validly to assess student learning with
respect to her primary unit objective.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF ALIGNING ASSESSMENTS WITH OSJECTIVES
Our placement of the terrns assessments and objectives in the heading of this sec-
tion is important and intentional. In those areas in which teachers can exercise
discretion (i.e., those sta tes not completely given to high-stakes testing and
,
252 Section nI The Taxonomy in Use
those assessments teachers construct themselves), assessments should be
aligned with objectives, not vice versa. In OUI view, assessments provide
evidence of how well students have leamed what we intended them to learn.
Intentions precede evidence! The more difficult question 01 Whal's worth
leaming? should not be replaced by the far easier question What can and/ or
must we assess?
Having said this, we recognize that teachers often find themselves in situ-
ations where they have to align their objectives with extemal assessments.
Then the issue should be the alignrnent, not the aboye "chicken and egg" dis-
cussion. There are two major reasons for aligning assessment and objectives.
First, alignment increases the probability that students will have an opportu-
nity to leam the know ledge and cognitive processes ineluded on the various
assessments they will encounter. In today's world of high-stakes assessment,
denying students opportunities to leam has serious consequences for them as
well as for their teachers and adrninistrators. At the very least, then, alignrnent
ensures that teachers provide students with sorne minimum opportunity to
learn what is required.
Second, lor many students, objectives are defined by assessments, particu-
larly when assessments determine Ihe grades students receive. Their "job" be-
comes doing well on Ihe assessments so as to get "good grades." When assess-
ments and objectives are aJigned, Ihese "good grades" are more likely to
translate into "good Jearning." When objectives and assessments are mis-
aligned, however, students are more Iikely to put effort into learning what is
assessed Ihan to leam what is intended by the objectives.
Chapter 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Classroom Instruction 253
THE VALUE OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE The Taxonomy Table may have
its greatest value in relation to Ihis critical issue. We present óne method for es-
timating the alignment between objectives and assessment using the Taxon-
omy Table: First, identify the major unit objectives and determine the ceHs of
the Taxonomy Table to which they correspondo Second, identify the major as-
sessments and determine the ceHs lo which they correspondo AIso note
whether Ihe emphasis intended for each objective is reflected in the assess-
ment. If Ihe ceHs and emphases derived from Ihe first two steps do not match,
misalignrnent is evident. If the cells are Ihe same, furlher sludy of Ihe align-
ment of instructional activities and assessment tasks is in order. (We will say
more about this "furlher study" in the next section.)
Note Ihat the Taxonomy Table provides a common basis for examining ob-
jectives and assessments. Alignrnent is nol deterrnined by a direct comparison
of objectives with assessments; ralher, objectives and assessments are indepen-
dently placed in appropriate ceHs of Ihe Taxonomy Table. To the extent Ihat an
objective and an assessment are placed in Ihe same cell, alignment is evident.
In this way, fue comparison is made al a "deeper" level and is more Iikely lo fo-
cus on sludent leaming.
ALIGNING tNSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES WITH ASSESSMENTS
Traditionally, it has been assumed Ihat assessments are valid if Ihey match the
unit or course objectives. This type of validity is known as content validity. Be-
ginning in the 1970s, however, the assumption was questioned. Sorne argued
Ihat the validity 01 Ihe assessments depended on whal was taught in Ihe class-
room, not whal was supposed to be taughl in Iight of fue objectives. This type
of validity was referred to as instructional validity or instructional sensitivity
(Thomdike, Cunningham, Thomdike, and Hagen, 1991).
The relationship between instructional activities and assessment tasksl score
points can range fram being so dose as to be identical tó being so distinct as to
be completely oul of alignrnent. Consider there doseness in the Parliamentary
Acts vignette, for example. The activities on Days 2 and 3 were intended to pro-
vide the general knowledge needed for the major assessment (Le., the editorial);
those on Days 4 and 5 were designed to pravide students with the persuasive
writing knowledge and skills Ihey would need to write the editorial. The activi-
ties on Days 6 and 7 allowed students to obtain the more specific knowledge
Ihey needed to complete Iheir specific editorial. Finally, sludents spent Ihe last
three days of Ihe unit in elass writing Iheir editorials, wilh teacher guidance and
supervision. TIús fmal instructional activity, Ihen, provided Ihe data Ihat would
ultirnately be used in making Ihe assessment.
Altematively, Ihe relationship between instructiorral activities and assess-
ment tasks may be a bit "Iooser." The instructional activities may be similar but
not identical to Ihe tasks included in Ihe assessment. In Ihe Nutrition vignette,
for example, one of fue instructional activities was for sludents to identify ap-
peals made in familiar television commercials for foods. The first activity
required sludents to place each appeal into one of six "type of appeal" catego-
ries. In fue second activity, students watched commercials playecí on a video-
cassette recorder and, in groups, evaluated how well the commercial
"worked." The end result of this activity was a set of criteria for "being con-
vincing." The assessment task that followed required sludent;;, working in
graups of two to four, to design a commercial !hal included one or more ap-
peals and was "convincing." This assessment task required a conceptual un-
derstanding of Ihe six appeal "types" (the flrst activity) as well as Ihe criteria
for "being convincing" (lhe secpnd activity) . .
FinaIly, Ihe instructional activities may be completely unrelated lO the
assessment tasks, as iIIustrated in fue Macbeth vignette. None of the instruc-
tional activities focused solely or primarily on fue details of the play. Ralher,
Ihe activities emphasized basic concepts (e.g., moti!, irany) and required slu-
dents to make inferences (e.g., predict what would happen, explain the reason-
ing). In contrast, however, Ihe end-of-unit test included questions fuat focused
exclusively on the details of Ihe play (e.g., matching activities for qualities wilh
people, matching eharacters with familiar quotations). In fuis case, fuere were
two assessments: the graup project and fue end-of-unit test. Whereas the fírst
,
l· 254 Section m The Taxonorny in Use
was not aligned wilh the instructional activities, lhe seeond was nieely aligned
wllh lhem.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF ALIGNING INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVIT·IES WITH
ASSESSMENTS As we mentioned earlier, instruetional aetivities and assess-
ment tasks can be identieal in terms of lheir substance (e.g., knowledge, eogni_
tive pr~ess) and their forrn (e.g., multiple choice, performance assessments).
They dlffer prlmarlly ID lhelf funehon. Instruehonal aetivities are intended to
help students leam, whereas assessment tasks are intended to determine
whether or how well students have leamed.
Ensuring lhat students eneounter instructional activities !hat are similar to
assessment tasks in substance inereases lhe instruetional validity of lhe assess-
mento Ensuring that students encounter instruetional activities lhat are similar
to assessment tasks in form increases lhe likelihood lhey will perform better on
external assessments by getting lhem used to different task formats and differ-
ent testing eonditions (e.g., timed tests).
Anolher way to align assessments with instructional activities when per-
formance assessment is used is to ensure lhat students Remember, Understand,
and can Apply lhe evaluation eriteria or scoring rubrico As in lhe Nutrition vi-
gnette, students can be involved in determining lhe criteria or rubrico This
strenglhens lhe link between instructional activities and assessment tasks even
more.
When assessment tasks and instruetional activities are severely out 01
alignment, teachers cannot properly estimate the effeetiveness of lhe instrue-
tional activities. For example, Mr. Parker (Volcanoes vignette) may do a won-
derful job of teaching conceptual understanding (the objective). If lhe formal
assessment consisted of a series of facts about volcanoes in differen! regions 01
the country and throughout the world, however, students may not do very
well on this assessmen!. Based on lhe. data from lhe assessment, lhen, we might
conclude lhat the instruction provided by Mr. Parker was ineffective. A sorne-
what more logical inference would be lhat the objective and lhe assessrnent
were misaligned.
THE VALUE OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE Once again, the value of lhe Tax-
onomy Table here stems largely from its use as an analytic tool. Within lhe con-
text of more traditional assessment (e.g., a test), the correct plaeement of an oh-
jeetive in lhe Taxonomy Table provides dues to lhe appropriate assessment
tasks for lhat objective. For example, an objective lhat facuses on applying pro-
eedural knowledge generally has assessment tasks lhat inc1ude (1) a new or novel
problem situation, (2) a question to be answered or directions to be followed,
and (3) a set of response options or a space within which student work can be
demonstrated and lhe final answer given. Knowing this basie strueture, the
teacher can design or seleet a fairly large set of assessment tasks. Once this set
is developed, sorne may be incorporated into lhe instructional aetivities (to fa-
eilitate leaming) and olhers may be set aside exdusively for assessment pur-
Chapler 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Classroorn Inslruction 255
poses (to see how welllearning occurred). In this way, lhe alignment between
instruction and assessment is strenglhened without compromising the in-
tegrity of lhe tasks used for assessment.
If, in this exampIe, students are expected to demonstrate lheir work and
write lheir answer, lhen sorne type of scoring guide (e.g., rating scales, seoring
rubrie) must be developed. This scoring guide shouId c1arify the teacher's ex-
pectations in terms of performance when shared wilh lhe students and serve
as a link between instruetional activities and assessment tasks.
ALIc>l'I l l'1G INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES WITH OSJECTIVES
One might think that if lhe assessments are aligned wilh lhe objectives and lhe
instructional activities are aligned with lhe assessments, lhen lhe instructional
activities will automatieally be a1igned wilh the objectives. This is usually, but
not always, lhe case. It is possible for teaehers to indude instructional aetivities
lhat are not direetly related to either lhe objectives or assessments. In many
cases, these activities are intended to provide students wilh lhe information
lhey need to master an objective.
In lhe Report Writing vignette,for example, the first two objectives per-
tained to selecting sources of information and, uItimately , specific information
about a famous person in American history. As written, lhe objectives assumed
that lhe students already had a person in mind. That was not lhe case, how-
ever. Consequently, the aetivities in Days 5--8 related to the task of ehoosing a
famous persono Certainly lhis is an important task because wilhout it students
could not progress toward lhe unit objectives; however, the activity is prepara-
tory to, not a1igned wilh, lhe objectives.
THE SIGNIFICANC.E OF ALIGNING ACTIVJTIES WITH OBJECTIVES Our
final generalization suggests lhe value of checking a1ignment one more time.
We believe this final check identifies instructional activities lhat are unrelated
or, at best, tangentially related to lhe unit objeetives. We do not believe lhe tan-
gentially related activities shouId be discarded out of hand, however. Within
lhe context of an instructional unit, aetivities playa variety of roles.
For example, sorne aetivities are intended to introduce lhe unit to stu-
dents. The Nutrition vignette contained an activity in which students were to
identify products from their "hooks," which focused on arousing student
interes!.
Other activities are intended to enhanee student engagement or involve-
ment in lhe uni!. In lhe Maebeth vignette, students were given a choice among
three film versions of the play.
Sorne activities foreshadow material that will be eneountered later and so
are intended to laya foundation. An example comes from lhe Addition Facts
vignette, in which lhe coneept of "additive inverse" was explored (wilhout
ever using lhe name).
,
256 Section III The Taxonomy in Use
Finally, there are activities that function as pre-assessments; that is, deter-
minations of what sludents "bring to" the unít in terms of their knowledge and
cognitive processes. The activity in the Volcanoes? Here? vignette of having
sludents draw their conceptions of volcanoes was one such example.
Knowing the function of the inslructional activities within an inslructional
unit is essential to determining the activities that may seem irrelevant but that
serve special functions not represented in the Taxonomy Table. Eliminating
such activities can result in a "tighter," more efficient unit. And, in today's
world, efficiency is indeed a virlue in light of the vast array of objectives that
are competing for a limited amount of classroom time.
THE VALUE OF THE TAXONOMY TABLE The value of the Taxonomy
Table with respect to this final generalization is the same as we described for
the other two generalizations pertaining to alignment. In summary, the Taxon-
omy Table is an analytic tool that enables teachers to conduct a "deeper"
examination of alignment, one that goes beyond the surface fealures of activi-
ties and objectives to their common underlying meaning in terms of sludent
learning.
A FINAL COMMENT
Teachers (and educators in general) have confronted the four questions posed
at the beginning of this chapter since the publication of the original Handbook
almost a half-century ago, and long before. Although the TaxonomY Table can-
not provide answers to these questions, we believe the framework provides a
basis for a useful discussion of them. More specifi~ally, the Taxonomy Table can
enable teachers and those who work with teachers to consider these long-
standing questions in a different light-to gain new insights into them and, us-
ing the generalizations derived from the vignettes, gain a new understanding
ofthem.
For example, when viewed through the lens of the Taxonomy Table, a rela-
tively simple concept such as "alignment" takes on new meaning. It is not suf-
ficient to align instruction and assessment based on only types of knowledge
or cognitive process categories. It is only when alignment involves the intersec-
tion of knowledge with process (Le., the objective) that it is likely to result in
increased sludent leaming. This added degree of precision helps us under-
stand both why previous efforts at alignment may not have been successful
and what kinds of future efforts need to be made. Once gained, these insights
and this understanding can help teachers develop solution strategies not
thought of before.
Chapter 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Classroom Instruction 257
UNSOLVED PROBLEMS
Although we hope our revision is an improvement over the original Handbook,
those who work on heuristic frameworks find that the quest for a better one
never ends. With each attempt, one does the best one can with the approach
chosen, while being aware of aspects that, could they be accommodated,
would make the framework still more useful. Following are some issues that
may provide challenges for those who seek to take the next steps.'
THE TIME DEMAND5 OF ANALY5I5
The analysis proposed in the vignette chapters is labor intensive. We believe
that it is worth the investment, however, as it helps one leam the analysis
process, and where a unit or course is repeated, for very large classes, or for
those involved in distance education. But for classes that require extensive up-
dating every time they are taught, that are approached differently each time,
that are very small, and/or that are offered irregularly, the inveslrnent may not
be warranted. Even for these, however, having the categories of our framework
in mind willlikely spark efforts to broaden the range of knowledge and cogni-
tive processes that are included and thereby strengthen what is offered. Other
frameworks may be better altematives for those cases where a heavy invest-
ment in planning and analysis is more difficult to justify.
THE LINKAGE OF OB.JECTIYE5 AND IN5TRUCTION
The linkage between objectives and instruction needs further sludy. Although
we have noted instances where the characteristics of inslructional activities are
suggested by the nalure of the educational objectives, specifying a learning ob-
jective does not automatically lead to a prescribed method of inslruction. This,
of course, was the expectation of the performance-based movement of the late
1960s and early 1970s. Researchers were to determine what teaching methods,
instructional strategies, or teacher behaviors would produce particular leam-
ing under specified circumstances. They did not then, and they still haven' t. In
fact, many now believe it is unrealistic to expect they ever will. Until and un-
less ,the linkage of objectives to inslructional activities can be markedly
strengthened, we believe the current boundaries of how far a framework such
as ours can usefully suggest appropriate inslruction are illustrated by the ex-
amples in our vignette analyses.
What might help teachers is a framework that facilitates the transition from
abstract goals to general teaching strategies to concrete instructional activi-
ties that can facilitate goal attainment by large numbers of students. Can a
1 A more extensive discussion of unsolved problems appears in fue complete edition of this book
as Chapter 17.
,
2SB Section ID The Taxonomy in Use
framework be developed that is more facilitative than those now available?
Obviously, this is an empirical question, but it will not be an easy task.
LACK OF PROGRE SS IN MULTIPLE-CHOICE ITEM FORMATS
An important feature of the original Handbook was its extensive modeling of
multiple-ehoice item formats for eaeh taxonomic category. Although Chapter 5
is helpful in identifying assessment formats, the examples are more useful in
illustrating and clarifying the kinds of cognitive processes to be expected in a
given process category than they are in demonstrating the variety of ways stu-
dent learning within a given category might be accomplished.
Although the technology of testing has made substantial advances in the
years since the publication of the original Handbook, the field of item writing
unfortunately has progressed little. In Sternberg's (1997) words: "There is one
industry ... that remains a glaring exception to the general rapid rate of tech-
nological progress ... ," He continues in an ironic vein, "an example of innova-
tion ... (as announced fairly recently by one testing company) is including
mathematical ability items that are not multiple-choice; they are fill-in-the-
blank items" (p. 1137). Forty-four years after publication of the Handbook, we
could add little that would show any advance in item writing. Ed~cators
should not forget the usefulness of portfolios and other performance assess-
ments, but those seeking additional suggestions on test items appropriate for a
given Taxonomy category should revisit the original Handbook as well as books
like Smith and Tyler (1942). Paul and Nosieh (1992) provide models for mea-
suring higher-level thinking Haladyna (1997) intends to help individuals test
for complex behaviors; and Hannah and Michaelis (1977) indude sample items
for their categories.
RELATIONSHIP TO A THEORY OF LEARNING AND COGNITION
Ideally, the dimensions of our framework and the ordering of its categories
should be based on a single, widely accepted, and functional theory of learn-
ing. Advances in cognitive theories have contributed to our revision. Despite
the many advances since the original Handbook, however, the single psycholog-
ical theorythat adequately provides a basis for allleaming has yet to found.
RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE DOMAINS
The authors of the Handbook divided objectives into tillee domains: cognitive,
affective, and psychomotor. This decision has been justly criticized because it
isolates aspects of the same objective-and nearly every cognitive objective has
an affective component. For example, English teachers want a student not on1y
to learn to critique good literature but also to value it, appreciate it, and seek
opportunities to encounter it. Making affective aspects regularly planned parts
of instruction would be facilitated if the Taxonomy were better integrated
across the domains.
IN CLOSING
Chapter 14 Addressing Long-standing Problems in Classroom Instruction 2S9
By intentionally focusing on the cognitive domain, this revision ignores
this problem except for the fact, as noted earlier, that the Metaeognitive Knowl-
edge eategory in sorne respeets bridges the cognitive and affeetive domains.
However, a number of alternative frameworks indude an affeetive eomponent.
Hauenstein (1998), for example, provided an affeetive taxonomy in addition to
a cognitive one (and a psychomotor one too). None of the alternative frame-
works seems to have drawn a wide following as yet. Our hope, however, is that
by including a discussion of them in the complete edition of this book (see its
Chapter 15), they may gain added visibility. Sorne of them may provide ideas
that may prove attractive in the future.
Like the original framework, our revision will be most beneficial to those who
adapt it to their purposes. Bloom, Hastings, and Madaus (1971) showed how
the original framework could be adapted to better fit a number of fields: lan-
guage arts (Moore and Kennedy, 1971), mathematics G. W. Wilson, 1971), art
education (B. G. Wilson, 1971), social studies (Orlandi, 1971), and science
(Klopfer, 1971). McGuire (1963) modified the framework for medical education
as well. These authors adjusted the breaks between categories to fit their sub-
ject matter fields and created subcategories to highlight important discipline-
related distinctions. Sorne of those adjustments to the original framework
would be equally applicable to this revision; sorne could be further altered to
increase their effectiveness. Although the revision, of necessity, was developed
as a generally applicable framework, we strongly encourage users to adapt it
creatively to their particular requirements.
All frameworks such as the Taxonomy are abstractions of reality that sim-
plify in order to facilitate perceptions of underlying orderliness. This frame-
work is no exception. Just as the proof of good food is in the eating, the value
of a conceptual framework such as this one lies in its applicability-the breadth
and depth of its use and its impact on the field.
There is mueh in the original Handbook that is worth preserving. Its contin-
uous and widespread citation attests to its perceived value over time. "In a
field marked by wide pendulum swings, the likelihood of finding an idea, con-
cept, or point of view that has remained constant in its acceptance and applica-
tion is small indeed. Without doubt, the Taxonomy is one of these rarities" (An-
derson and Sosniak, 1994, p. viii). We hope we have preserved the essentials of
the original, have borrowed the best ideas from alternative frameworks and
advances in cognitive theories and researeh, and have created a revision that is
more serviceable and user-friendly-that our revision may become as familiar
to educators as the original.
Appendixes
261
ApPENDIX A
Summary Of the Changes
from the Original Framework
The original framework consisted of six major categories arranged in fue follow-
ing order: Knowledge, Comprehension, Application, Analysis, Synthesis, and
Evaluation. The categories aboye Knowl~ge were collectively labeled "abilities
and skills." It was understood !hat Knowledge is used in eaeh of the abilities and
skills because fueiI effective use requiIes fue appropriate knowledge.
Each category had subcategories: Knowledge and Comprehension, many;
the rest, few. The categories and subcategories were presumed to lie along a
continuum, from simple to complex and from concrete to abstracto The rela-
tionships among the categories along the continuum were presumed to consti-
tute a cumulative hierarchy (see point 11 below).
Readers familiar wifu the original frarnework will recognize !hat we have
made a number oí changes, 12 in all: four ehanges in emphasis, four in termi-
nology, and four in structure. Most important, we have changed the focus of
fue documento
FOUR CHANGES IN EMPHASIS
l. THE REVISION'S PRIMARY Focus 15 ON THE TAXONOMY IN USE
The revision emphasizes the use of the Taxonomy in planning curriculum, in-
struction, assessment, and the alignrnent of these three. This emphasis is a ma-
jor shift from the original focus on assessment, providing extensive examples
of test items for each of the six categories: The contrast between the two ver-
sions is seen most sharply by comparing fue proportions of the original version
and ofthe revision given to examples of fue use of the Taxonomy in curricu-
lum planning and instruction. In the initial version, fue proportion is small. In
the revision, 11 of the 17 chapters describe the application of the framework.
Chapters 1, 2, 3, and 6 introduce the use of fue framework in planning and an-
alyzing curriculum, instruction, asse, ssment, and alignment. Chapter 7 de-
scribes its use in the preparation and analysis of classroom vignettes, and
Chapters 8--13 present the vignettes and their analysis. Chapter 14 develops
263
264 Appendixes
nine generalizations concerning critical educational issues that grow out of
Ihose analyses.
The group Ihat developed Ihe original Handbook was largely college and
university examiners who anticipated Ihat its initial use would be in Ihe
exchange of test items among institutions. However, as Ben Bloom indicated in
his opening remarks to Ihe originators at Iheir first working conference (Bloom,
1949), he expected considerably broader use; Ihe problems with which Ihe Tax-
onomy deals are universal. Thls revision not on1y demonstrates Ihat his per-
ceptions were realistic but also modifies the Taxonomy in ways intended to
make it increasingly and more broadly effedive.
2. THE REVISION 15 AIMED AT A BROADER AUDIENCE. EMPHASIZING TEACHERS
The revision is designed to be of use to teachers at all grade levels. Qur
group particularly kept Ihe elementary and secondary classroom teacher in
mind. The touchstone was: How would this change make the Taxonomy
more useful for all teachers? The answers guided our decisions. Whereas
the initial version was aimed largely at higher education, with almost no
examples drawn from elementary and seeondary education, instances from
the latter predominate in the revision. Indeed, all of the vignettes are pre-
collegelevel.
3. SAMPLE ASSESSMENT TASKS ARE INCLUDED PRIMARILY TO CONVEY MEANING
The revision includes sample assessment tasks (e.g., performance tasks, test
items) primarily to help illustrate and clarify the meaning of Ihe various cate-
gories. Because of Ihe amazing lack of progress in item writing between the
original Handbook and our revision, Ihere seemed no way we could improve on
Ihe original in this respecto Because of the considerable emphasis on model test
items (primarily mulliple choice) in Ihe first edition-almost 40 percent of Ihe
pages-it is the better source of item formats. Many of the formats developed
by Smilh and Tyler (1942) for the Eight Year Study are still sorne of Ihe elever-
est devised for measuring complex eognitive processes.
4. THE REVISION EMPHASIZES THE SUBCATEGORIES
The original framework emphasized Ihe six major categories ralher Ihan their
subcategories, describing Ihe former in considerable detail. In the revision, def~
initions of Ihe major categories emerge most clearly from Ihe extensive descrip-
tion and illustration of Ihe subcategories (Le., knowledge subtypes and specilic
cognitive processes) and their use in the analysis of Ihe vignettes. (See Chap-
ters 4 and 5 and all chapters in Section m.)
Appendix A Summary 01 fue Changes frem fue Original Framework
265
FOUR CHANGES IN TERMINOLOGY
S. MA.JOR CATEGORY TITLES WERE MADE CONSISTENT WITH
How OB.JECTIVES ARE FRAMED
We adjusted the original terms to provide consistency with Ihe way objectives
are framed, which was missing in Ihe initial framework. Educational objectives
indicate Ihat the student should be able to do something (verb) to or wilh
something (noun)-a verb-noun relationship. The knowledge categories gen-
erally supply the nouns in objectives, and this was reflected in the original
structure's fírst category, Knowledge, which was a noun. However, Ihe remain-
ing categories of Ihe original framework were also nouns (e.g., Application,
Analysis, etc.), whereas Ihey take Ihe verb foem (e.g., apply, analyze, etc.) when
used in objectives. We decided to relabel these categories in their verb forms
(e.g., Apply, Analyze, etc.) to reflect the verp-noun relationship. For complete-
ness, Knowledge was renamed Remember.
6. THE KNOWLEDGE SUBCATEGORIES WERE RENAMED AND REORGANIZED
Because of the emphasis on the six categories in the original Handbook, sorne
people forget there were subcategories of Knowledge. In Ihe Handbook, these
subeategories were delineated in an appendix. Qur review of alternative
frameworks devised sinee the publication of Ihe Handbook (see Chapter 15) as
well as research on learning led us to reframe the Knowledge subcategories as
four types of knowledge: Factual knowledge, Conceptual knowledge, Procedural
knowledge, and a new subcategory, Metacognitive knowledge. As we indicated in
Chapter 4, one easily can locate Ihe counterparts to Factual, Conceptual, and Pra-
cedural knowledge in Ihe original Kno:wledge subcategories. We anticipate that
the new category will bring needed attention to metacognitive objectives.
7. SUBCATEGORIES OF THE COGNITIVE PROCESS CATEGORIES WERE
REPLACED BY VERBS
In the original framework the subcategories of Ihe five categories beyond
Knowledge were either nouns or nominative phrases (e.g., translation, inter-
pretation, extrapolation within Comprehension). Verbs of the kind used by
teachers in statements of objectives and during instruction seemed more help-
fuI in framing and categorizing objectives, instrudional activities, anel assess-
ment tasks. We replaced Ihe nouns with verbs (e.g., interpreting, exemplifi.¡ing,
inferring). To distinguish them from the major category verb names, we call
Ihem "cognitive processes." Why did we choose particular verbs to replace Ihe
original subcategories? The verbs selected met two criteria: (1) they repre-
sented cognitive processes incorporated wilhin cognitive theory and research,
..
266 Appendixes
and (2) Ihey were the type of processes commonly encountered in statements
of objectives and unit plans of teaehers.l
instructional activities, and assessment tasks are examined in the context of the
Taxonomy Table, issues of aligrunent can be addressed.
8. COMPREHENSION ANO SVNTHESIS WERE RETITLEO
We retitled two of the major categories: Comprehension became Understand
and Synlhesis became Crea te. The reasons for these changes are discussed in
Chapler 5 and, for Understand, in Ihe lasl sedion of this chapter.
FOUR CHANGES IN STRUCTURE
9. THE NOUN ANO VERB COMPONENTS OF OB.lECTIVES BECAME
SEPARATE DIMENSIONS
Advances in researeh on learning and dislinctions rnade in alternative laxo-
nomic frameworks caused us lo rethink Ihe role of knowledge in Ihe original
slructure. Ultimately, we separated Ihe noun and verb components implicit in
the original Knowledge category. The noun asped relained Ihe lahel Knowl-
edge but became a separate dimension wilh the four categories as noted in
point 6 above. (See also the knowledge dimension on Ihe inside lront cover.)
The verb aspect of Knowledge became Ihe category Remember, which re-
placed Ihe original Knowledge classification in Ihe six major categories, now a11
consisting of verbs. Its verb form describes the aclion implicil in Ihe original
Knowledge category; the firs! thing one does in learning knowledge is to re-
member il. Considered the least complex of the six process categories, Remember
occupies Ihe botlom rung originally occupied by Knowledge. Togelher the six
major categories, expressed as verbs to describe what one does with or to
Knowledge, form Ihe cognitive process dimension (see inside back cover).
I
Appendix A Surnmary 01 !he Changes ÍTom !he Original Framework 267
10. THE Two DIMENSIONS ARE THE BASIS FOR OUR ANALYTICAL TOOL,
THE TAXONOMV TABLE
Determining !hat knowledge would be a new dimension logically led us to make
its relationship to !he cognitive process dimension explicit in a two-dimensional
structure we call Ihe Taxonomy Table (see inside front cover). The cells of !he Tax-
onomy Table contain the educational objectives. In addition lo cJassifying
objectives,!he Taxonomy Table permits!he analysis of instructional activities and
assessment tasks (as shown in Ihe vignettes, Chapters 8-13). When objectives,
11. THE PROCESS CATEGORIES Do NOT FORM A CUMULATlVE HIERARCHY
The revised framework is a hierarehy in Ihe sense Ihal Ihe six major categories
of Ihe cognitive process dimension are presumed lo be ordered in terms of in-
creasing complexity. The categories of the original seheme were claimed to be a
cumulative hierarchy, however. This meant Ihal mastery of a more complex
calegory required prior mastery of a11 the less complex calegories below it-a
stringent standard. Subsequent researeh provided empirical evidence for a cu-
mulative hierarchy ior the three middle categories, Comprehension, Applica-
tion, and Analysis, but empirical support was weak for ordering the last two
(see Chapter 162).
As required in a cumulative hiera:rchy, the original calegories were pre-
sumed not lo overlap. Indeed, sorne of the boundaries of Ihe original six cate-
gories were designed to make distinct categories by arbitrary stipulation. An
important eharacteristic of Ihe revised Taxonomy, however, is that in order to
conform lo the language that teachers use, Ihe six categories are allowed to
overlap on a scale of judged complexity:Therefore, the revision places much
greater importance on leacher usage Ihan on developing a slricl hierarchy.
This change is clearly illuslrated in Ihe case oi Ihe category Understand.
Looking al Ihe ways Understand is used, Ihese are clearly broader Ihan Ihe defi-
nition given lo ils predecessor, Comprehend. Therefore, the subcategories that
define Ihe limits oi Ihe Understand category are allowed lo overlap Apply. For
example, Understand is one step less complex Ihan Apply in Ihe six-calegory hi-
erarchy. Therefore, explaining, which is a cognitive process lisled within Under-
stand, would also be expected to be a step down in complexity from the sim-
plest process in Apply. This is not the case. Instead, this is one instance where
Ihe process (in this case explaining) equals or exceeds the judged complexity of
Ihe next category up in Ihe hierarchy (in this case Apply).
If we were to prevent categories from overlapping, we would have had to
place explaining in Apply, Analyze, Evaluate, or Create. But, explaining isn't a
kind of applying, or analyzing, evaluating, or ereating. It exemplifies a kind 01
understanding, and so that is where we categorized it, even Ihough it is cer-
tainly a more complex process Ihan most simple inslances of application.
Does !hat mean Ihat we don't have a kind of hierarchy? We don't think so.
Conceplually, if we rnarked off Ihe judged range of eaeh category on Ihe cogni-
tive process dimension along a continuum from simple lo complex, Ihe center
of each category going from Remember to Create would be successively greater
in complexily. Furlhermore, allhough we have changed Ihe definitions slighlly,
1 The necessity of translating the Taxonomy categories into the verbs used in objectives was recog-
nized ear1y by Metfesset Michael, and Kirsner (1969). To facilitate the work of teachers, adminis-
trators, and other users of the framework, they provided a thesaurus-like list that suggested alter-
native verbs ior each oi the major Taxonomy categories.
2 Chapter 16 appears onIy in the hardcover edition of this book.
268 Appenclixes
Appendix A Surnmary 01 !he Changes from !he Original Framework
269
we do not believe we have altered them sufficiently that the empirical evidence
found for the original categories is invalidated for the revision. This evidence
supports the hierarchical arder for the least complex categories (described in
Chapter 16).
12. THE ORDER OF SVNTHESIS/CREATE AND EVALuATIONlEvALuATE
WAsINTERCHANGED
We interchanged the order of the top two cognitive pmcess categories, placing
Create as the most complex category instead of Evaluate. A rationale for this
reordering is given in Chapter 16.
Figure A.1 surnmarizes the structural relationship of the six original cate-
gories and the revised structure.
FIGURE A.I Summary of the Structural Changes from the Original Framework to
the Revision
Separate f--- Knowledge
/'-__ d_im_e_n_s_io_n_---' dimension
/ounaspect
Knowledge
Remember
Verb aspeet
Comprehension
Understand
Application
Apply
1-
Cognitive
process
dimension
Analysis
Analyze
Synthesis
Evaluate
Evaluation
~
Create
THE INCLUSION OF UNOERSTANOING ANO THE OMISSION OF
PROBLEM SOLVING ANO CRITICAL THINKING
Two of the many questions that could be raised about the revision are:
• In the changes, why did "comprehension" become "understand"?
• Why weren't important pmcesses like pmblem solving and critical think-
ing induded?
These two questions are important and we spent considerable time discussing
them as well as several others. (In fact, several times David Krathwoh1 re-
minded us that the original group spent considerable time on these questions
as well. This was his way of telling us to "move on.")
With respect to understanding, the authors of the Handbook were con-
cerned lhat, insofar as possible, the categories did not overlap. But that is cliffi-
cult when a term takes on a wide range of different meanings. Consider the
many possibilities of meanings when teachers want their students to "under-
stand Ohm's law." They could indude applying the law, analyzing a pmblem to
determine whether the law is applicable, evaluating the use of Ohm's law in a
pmblem, or even combining the law with others to solve a pmblem (a creative
process).
Another example of the wide range of possibilities in "understand" is sug-
gested by Wiggins and McTighe (1998, pp. 44-62). They argue that when we
truly understand, we can explain, can interpret, can apply, will have perspec-
tive, can empathize, and will have self-knowledge--a wide range of meanings
that indude aspects normally considered affective (e.g., empathize) instead of
cognitive. To many, this may be stretching the comrnon connotation of the
term, but, because of this possible fuzziness, the original group avoided the
term lIunderstanding" and used "comprehension,"
Discussion of the Handbook in the years since its development has made
dear that teachers miss having a place where the term "Understand" can "fit."
The result is lhat, in determining how best to construct our framework, we con-
sidered a different criterion-namely, that the framework should embrace the
terms that teachers frequently use in talking about education. We replaced
"Comprehension" with "Understand" simply because the group working on
this volume gave more weight to the universal usage of the term in selecting
names for the categories.
Two other terms, Jlproblem solving" and JI critical thlnking," seem to have
characteristics similar to "understand." They are widely used and likewise
tend to become touchstones of curriculum emphasis. Both generally indude a
variety of activities that might be dassified in disparate cells of the Taxonomy
Table. That is, in any given instance, objectives that involve pmblem solving
and critical thinking most likely call for cognitive pmcesses in several cate-
gories on the pmcess dimensiono For example, to think critically about an issue
pmbably involves sorne Conceptual knowledge to Analyze the issue. Then, one
270 Appendixes
can Evaluate different perspectives in terms of lhe criteria and, perhaps, Create
a novel, yet defensible perspective on the issue.
In contrast with understanding, lhen, critical thinking and problem solv-
ing tend to cut across rows, columns, and cells of lhe Taxonomy Table. With re-
spect to problem solving, for example, the particular rows, columns, and cells
selected, and the order in which specific cognitive processes and knowledge
subtypes would be expected to be used, would depend to a great extent on lhe
particular type of problem being solved and/or the subject maller within which
the problem was posed. Thus, unlike understanding, critical thinking and
problem solving did not seem to be prime substitutes for any single category
in lhe framework. Therefore, despite our interest in employing lhe terms teach-
ers use, we did not see a way to effectively include problem solving or critical
lhinking as major headings in our revision.
1
ApPENDIX B
Condensed Version Of the Original
Taxonomy of Educational
Objectives:
Cognitive Domain 1
KNOWLEDGE
1.00 KNOWLEDGE
Knowledge, as defined here, involves lhe recan of specifics and universals, lhe
recan of melhods and processes, or lhe recall of a pallern, structure, or setting.
For measurement purposes, lhe recan situation involves little more lhan bring-
ing to mind lhe appropriate material. AIlhough sorne alteration of lhe material
may be required, this is a relatively minor par! of lhe task. The knowledge ob-
jectives emphasize most the psychological processes of remembering. The
process of relating is also involved in that a knowledge test situation requires
the organization and reorganization of a problem such that it will furnish the
appropriate signals and cues for the information and knowledge the individ-
ual possesses. To use an analogy, if one thinks of lhe mind as a file, lhe problem
in a knowledge test situation is lhat of finding in lhe problem or task the ap-
propriate signals, cues, and clues which will most effectively bring out what-
ever knowledge is filed or stored.
1 .10 KNOWLEDGE OF SPECIFICS
The recan of specific and isolable bits of information. The emphasis is on sym-
bols with concrete referents. This material, which is at a very low level of
abstraction, may be thought of as lhe elements from which more complex and
abstract forms of knowledge are bullt.
lHandbook, pp. 201-207.
271
272 Appendixes
1.11 KNOWLEDGE OF TERMINOLOGY
Knowledge of Ihe referents for specific symbols (verbal and non-verbal). This
may include knowledge of Ihe most generally accepted symbol referent,
knowledge of Ihe variety of symbols which may be used for a single reterent,
or knowledge of the referent most appropriate to a given use of a symbo1.
• To define technical terms by giving Iheir attributes, properties, or relations.·
• Familiarity with a large number of words in Iheir eommon range of
meanings.
1.12 KNOWLEDGE OF SPECIFIC FACTS
1.20 t .2 t Knowledge of dates, events, persons, plaees, etc. This may include very precise
and speeific information sueh as the specific date or exaet magnitude of a phe-
nomenon. It may also include approximate or relative information such as an
approximate time period or Ihe general order of magnitude of a phenomenon.
• The recall of major faets about particular cultures.
• The possession of a minimum knowledge about Ihe organisrns studied
in Ihe laboratory. .
KNOWLEDGE OF WAYS AND MEANS OF DEALlNG WITH SPECIFICS
Knowledge of the ways of organizing, studying, judging, and criticizing. 'This
includes the methods of inquiry, Ihe chronological sequenees, and the stan-
dards of judgment within a field as well as the pattems of organization
Ihrough which Ihe areas of Ihe fields themselves are determined and intemally
organized. This knowledge is at an intermediate level of abstraction between
speeific knowledge on Ihe one hand and knowledge of universals on the other.
It does not so much demand Ihe activity of Ihe student in using the materials
as it does a more passive awareness of their nature.
KNOWLEDGE OF CONVENTIONS
Knowledge of characteristic ways of treating and presenting ideas and phe-
nomena. For purposes of cornmunication and consistency, workers in a field
employ usages, styles, practices, and forms which best suit Iheir purposes
and/or which appear to suit best the phenomena with which they dea!. It
should be recognized Ihat allhough these forms and conventions are likely to
be set up on arbitrary, accidental, or authoritative bases, Ihey are retained be-
cause of Ihe general agreement or coneurrence of individuals concemed with
the subjeet, phenomena, or problem.
• Familiarity with Ihe forrns and conventions of Ihe major types of works,
e.g., verse, plays, scientific papers, etc.
• To make pupils conscious of eorrect form and usage in speech and writing.
*Illustrative educational objectives selected from the literature.
Appendix B Condensed Version 01 the Original Taxonomy of Educationol Objectives 273
1.22 KNOWLEDGE OF TRENDS AND SEQUENCES
Knowledge of the processes, directions, and movements of phenomena with
respect to time.
• Understanding of Ihe continuity and development of American culture
as exemplified in American life.
• Knowledge of the basic trends underlying the development of public
assistance programs.
1.23 KNOWLEDGE OF CLASSIFICATIONS AND CATEGORIES
Knowledge of Ihe classes, sets, divisions, and arrangements which are regarded
as fundamental for a given subject field, purpose, argument, or problem.
• To reeognize Ihe area encompassed by various kinds of problems or
materials.
• Becoming familiar wilh a range of types of literature.
1.24 KNOWLEDGE OF CRITERIA
Knowledge of Ihe criteria by which faets, principies, opinions, and conduct are
tested or judged.
• Familiarity wilh criteria for judgment appropriate to Ihe type of work and
the purpose for which it is read.
• Knowledge of criteria for the evaluation of recreational activities.
t .25 KNOWLEDGE OF METHODOLOGY
Knowledge of the methods of inquiry, techniques, and procedures employed
in a particular subject field as well as Ihose employed in investigating particu-
lar problems and phenomena. The emphasis here is on Ihe individual's knowl-
edge of Ihe melhod ralher Ihan his ability to use Ihe melhod.
• Knowledge of scientific melhods for evaluating heallh eoncepts.
• The sludents shall know Ihe melhods of attack relevant to Ihe kinds of
problems of eoncem to the social sciences.
1.30 KNOWLEDGE OF THE UNIVERSALS AND ABSTRACTIONS IN A FIELD
Knowledge of the major schemes and pattems by whieh phenomena and ideas
are organized. These are the large structures, theories, and generalizations
which dominate a subject field or whieh are quite generally used in studying
phenomena or solving problems. These are at Ihe highest levels of abstraetion
and eomplexity.
274 Appendixes
1.31 1.32 KNOWLEDGE OF PRINCIPLES AND GENERALIZATIONS
Knowledge of particular abstractions which surnmarize observations of phe-
nomena. These are the abstractions which are of value in explaining, describ-
ing, predicting, or in determining the most appropriate and relevant action or
direction to be taken.
• Knowledge of the important principIes by which our experience wilh bio-
logical phenomena is surnmarized.
• The recall of major generalizations about particular cultures.
KNOWLEDGE OF THEORIES AND STRUCTURES
Knowledge of the body of principIes and generalizations together with Iheir in-
terrelations which present a clear, rounded, and systematic view of a complex
phenomenon, problem, or field. These are the most abstract formulations, and
Ihey can be used to show the interrelation and organization of a great range of
specifics.
• The recal! of major theories about particular cultures.
• Knowledge of a relatively complete formulation of Ihe theory of evolution.
INTELLECTUAL ABILITIES ANO SKILLS
Abilities and skills refer to organized modes of operation and generalized tech-
niques for dealing with materials and problems. The materials and problems
may be of such a nature Ihat little or no specialized and teclmical information
is required. Such information as is required can be assumed to be part of the in-
dividual's general fund of knowledge. Other problems may require specialized
and technical information at a rather high level such that specific knowledge
and skill in dealing with Ihe problem and the materials are required. The abili-
ties and skills objectives emphasize the mental processes of organizing and re-
organizing material to achieve a particular purpose. The materials may be
given or remembered.
2.00 COMPREHENSION
This represents the lowest level of understanding. It refers to a type of under-
standing or apprehension such that the individual knows what is being com-
municated and can make use of Ihe material or idea being communicated wilh-
out necessarily relating it to other material or seeing its fullest implications.
2.10 TRANSLATION
Comprehension as evidenced by Ihe care and accuracy with which Ihe commu-
nication is paraphrased or rendered from one language or íorm oí communica-
tion to another. Translation is judged on the basis of faithfu1ness and accuracy,
Appendix B Condensed Version oi the Original Taxonomy of Educational Objectives 275
that is, on the extent to which the material in the original communication is
preserved although the form of Ihe communication has been altered.
• The ability to understand non-literal statements (metaphor, symbolism,
irony, exaggeration).
• Skill in translating malhematical verbal material into symbolic statements
and vice versa.
2.20 INTERPRETATlON
The explanation or summarization oí a communication. Whereas translation
involves an objective part-for-part rendering of a communication, interpreta-
tion involves a reordering, rearrangement, or a new view of the material.
• The ability to grasp the thought of the work as a whole at any desired
level of generality. .
• The ability to interpret various types of social data.
2.30 EXTRAPOLATION
The extension oí trends or tendencies beyond Ihe given data to determine im-
plications, consequences, coroUaries, effects, etc., which are in accordance wilh
the conditions described in the original communication.
• The ability to deal with the conclusions of a work in terms of Ihe immedi-
ate inference made from Ihe explicit statements.
• Skill in predicting continuation of Irends.
3.00 ApPLICATION
The use oí abstractions in particular and concrete situations. The abstractions
may be in the form of general ideas, rules of procedures, or generalized meth-
ods. The abstractions may also be technical principIes, ideas, and theories
which must be remembered and applied.
• Application to Ihe phenomena discussed in one paper of the scientific
terms or concepts used in other papers.
• The ability to predict Ihe probable effect oí a change in a factor on a bio-
logical situation previously at equilibrium.
4.00 ANALYSIS
The breakdown oí a communication into its constituent elements or parts such
that the relative hierarchy of ideas is made clear and/or the relations belween
the ideas expressed are made explicit. Such analyses are intended to clarify the
communication, to indicate how Ihe communication is organized, and Ihe way
in which it manages to convey its effects, as weU as its basis and arrangement.
2715 Appendixes
4.tO ANALVSIS OF ELEMENTS
Identification of Ihe elemenls included in a communication.
• The ability lo recognize unstaled assumptions.
• Skil! in distinguishing facts from hypolheses.
4.20 ANALVSES OF RELATIONSHIPS
The connections and inleractions between elements and parts of a communication.
• Ability lo check Ihe consislency of hypolheses wilh given information and
assumptions.
• Skill in comprehending Ihe inlerrelationships among Ihe ideas in a passage.
4.30 ANALVSIS OF ORGANIZATIONAL PRINCIPLES
The organizalion, systematic arrangement, and structure which hold Ihe com-
munication togelher. This inc1udes Ihe "explicit" as well as Ihe "implicit" slnJc-
ture. It includes Ihe bases, necessary arrangemenl, and Ihe mechanics whiro
make Ihe communication a unit.
• The ability to recognize forrn and pallern in literary or artislic works as a
means of understanding Iheir meaning.
• Ability to recognize Ihe generallechniques used in persuasive malerials,
suro as advertising, propaganda, elc.
5.00 SVNTHESIS
The putting logelher of elements and parls so as lo forrn a whole. This involves
Ihe process of working wilh pieces, parls, elements, elc., and arranging and
combining Ihem in such a way as lo constitute a pallern or struclure nol clearly
Ihere before.
5.tO PRODUCTION OF A UNIQUE COMMUNICATION
The developmenl of a communication in which Ihe wriler or speaker allempts
to convey ideas, feelings, and/or experiences lo olhers.
• Skill in writing, using an excellenl organization of ideas and slalements.
• Ability lo lel! a personal experience effectively.
5.20 PRODUCTION OF A PLAN, OR PROPOSED SET OF OPERATIONS
The developmenl of a plan of work or Ihe proposal of a plan of operations. The
plan should satisfy requirements of Ihe lask which may be given lO Ihe studenl
or which he may develop for himself.
Appendix B Condensed Version oi!he Original Taxonomy of Educationa! Objectives 277
• Ability to propase ways of lesting hypolheses.
• Ability to plan a unil of inslruction for a particular teaching situation.
5.30 DERIVATION OF A SET OF ABSTRACT RELATIONS
The developmenl of a sel of abstract relations eilher lo classify or explain par-
ticular data or phenomena, or Ihe deduction of proposilions and relations from
a sel of basic propositions or symbolic representations.
• Ability lo formulate appropriate hypolheses based upon an analysis of
factors involved, and lO modify suro hypolheses in Ihe light of new
factors and considerations.
• Ability to make malhemalical discoveries and generalizations.
6.00 EVALUATION
Judgments aboul Ihe value of material and melhods for given purposes. Quan-
titative and qualitative judgments about Ihe extenl to which material and
melhods satisfy criteria. Use of a standard of appraisal. The criteria may be
Ihose determined by Ihe studenl or Ihose which are given to him.
6.tO .JUDGMENTS IN TERMS OF INTERNAL EVIDENCE
Evaluation of Ihe accuracy of a communication from suro evidence as logical
accuracy, consistency and other internal criteria.
• Judging by internal standards, Ihe ability to assess general probability of
accuracy in reporting facts from Ihe care given to exaclness of stalemenl,
documentation, proof, etc.
• The ability lo indicate logical fallacies in arguments.
6.20 .JUDGMENTS IN TERMS OF EXTERNAL CRITERIA
Evaluation of malerial wilh reference lo selected or remembered crileria.
• The comparison of major theories, generalizations, and facts about
particular cullures.
• Judging by exlernal standards, Ihe ability lo compare a work wilh Ihe
highest known slandards in ils field-especially wilh olher works of
recognized excel!ence.
References
Airasian, P. W. (1994). ¡mpact on testing and evaluation. In L. W. Anderson & L. A. Sos-
niak (Eds.), Bloom's taxonomy: A fony-year retrospective, Ninety-third Yearbook of the
National Society for the Study of Edueation (pp. 82-102). Chieago: University of
Chieago Press.
Alexander, P., Schallert, D., & Hare, V. (1991). Coming to terms: How researchers in
learning and literaey talk about knowledge. Review of Educational Reseorch, 61,
315-343.
American Association far the Advancement of Science. (1993). Benchmarks for serence
literacy. New York: Oxford University Press.
American Heritage Dictionary of ¡he English Language (3rd ed.). (1992). Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Anderson, J. R. (1983). The architecture of cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Anderson, L. W. (1995). International encyclopedia of teoching and teacher education, 2nd
ed. Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press.
Anderson, L. W. (Ed.), & Sosniak, L. A. (Eds.). (1994). Bloom's taxonomy: A for/y-yeor ret-
rospective. Ninety-third Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Eduea-
tion. Chieago: University of Chicago Press.
Armstrong, D. G. (1989). Developing and documenting the curriculum. Boston: Allyn
& Bacon.
Baker, E. L., O'Neil, H. E, & Linn, R. L. (1993). Policy validity prospects for performance-
based assessment. American Psychologist, 48, 121G-1218.
Baron, J. (1994). Thinking and deciding. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
-'7 Baxter, G. P., Elder, A. D., & Glaser, R. (1996). Knowledge-based cognition and perfor-
mance assessment in the science classroom. Educational Psychologist, 31, 133-140.
k Bereiter, c., & Scardamalia, M. (1998). Beyond Bloom's Taxonomy: Rethinking knowl-
' 1 edge for lhe knowledge age. In A. Hargreaves, A. Lieberman, M. Fullan & D.
Hopkins (Eds.), International handbook of educational change (pp. 675-692). London:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bloom, B. S. (1949). A taxonomy of educational objectives. Opening remarks of B. S. Bloom
far the meeting of examiners at Monticello, lliinois, November 27, 1949. Unpub-
lished manuscrip!.
Bloom, B. S. (clrca 1971). Some suggestions for chapters III, IV, v: Unpublished and un-
dated manuscript.
Bloom, B. S. (Ed.), Engelhart, M. D., Furst, E. J., Hill, W. H., & Krathwohl, D. R. (1956). Tax-
onomy of educational objectives: Handbook 1: Cognitive domain. New York: David McKay.
279
280 References
Bloom, B. S., Hastings, J. T., & Madaus, G. E (1971). Handbook on forma/ive and summa-
tive evalwztion o/ student leaming. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Bobbitl, p. (1918). The curriculum. Boston: Houghton MiffIin.
Boekaerts, M., Pintrich, P. R, & Zeidner, M. (2000). Handbook of self-regulalion. San
Diego: Academic Press.
Branslord, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (1999). How people leam: Brain, mind,
experience and schooI. Washington, OC: National Academy Press.
Broudy, H . S. (1970). Can research escape lhe dogma 01 OOucational objectives? School
Review, 79, 43-56.
Brown, A, Branslord, J., Ferrara, R, & Campione, J. (1983). l.earning, remembering,
and understanding. In P. H. Mussen (Series Ed.), J. Flavell & E. Markman (Vol.
Eds.), Handbook of ehild psyehology: Vol. 3. Cognilive development, 4th ed. (pp.
77-166). New York: Wiley.
Bruer, J. T. (1993). Schools for thoughl: A science of learning in the e/assroom. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Case, R (1998). The development 01 conceptual structures. In W. Damon (Series Ed.),
D. Kuhn & R Siegler (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of ehild psyehology: Vol. 2. Cogni/ion,
pereeplion, and language 5lh ed. (pp. 745-800). New York: Wiley.
Chi, M. (1992). Conceptual change within and across ontological categories: lmplica-
tions lor learning and discovery in sciences. In R Giere (Ed.), Cognilive madels of
seience. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy 01 Science, Vol. 15 (pp. 129,-186).
Minneapolis, MN: University 01 Minnesota Press.
Chi, M., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R (1981). Categorization and representation of physics
problems by experts and novices. Cogni/ive Science, 5,121-152.
Chi, M., SloHa, J., & del.eeuw, N . (1994). From things to processes: A lheory 01 concep-
tual change lar learning science conc'Fts. Learning and l"slruction, 4, 27-43.
Chung, B. M. (1994). The taxonomy in lhe Republic 01 Korea. In L. W. Anderson & L. A
Sosniak (Eds.), Bloom's taxonomy: A forty-year retrospeetive, Ninety-lhird Yearbook 01
lhe National Society for lhe Study of Education (pp. 164-173). Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Clandinin, D. L & ConneUy, E M. (1992). Teacher as curriculum maker. In P. W. Jackson
(Ed.), Handbook of research on curriculum (pp. 363-401). New York:
Macmillan.
deJong, T., & Ferguson-Hessler, M. (1996). Types and qualities 01 knowledge. Eduea-
lional Psyehologist, 31,105-113.
DeLandsbeere, V. (1977). On defIning educational objectives. Evaluation in Educa/ion:
Inlernalional Review Series, 1, 73-190.
Detlerman, D. K, & Stemberg, R. J. (1993). Transfer on lrial: Inlelligenee, cognilion, and
instruction. Norwood, NJ: ABLEX.
Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and educalion. New York: Free Press.
Dochy, E, & Alexander, P. (1995). Mapping prior knowledge: A framework of discus-
sion among researchers. European [oumal of PSYc/lOlogy in Education, 10, 224-242.
Doyle, W. (1992). Curriculum and pedagogy. In P. W. Jackson (Ed.), Handbook of research
on curriculum (pp. 486-516). New York: Macmil1an.
Dreeben, R (1968). On wluI/ is learned in seluIols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Duncker, K (1945). On problem solving. PsyeluIlogical Monographs, 58(5), Whole
No. 270.
Dunne, J. (1988). Teaching and lhe lirnits 01 technique: An analysis 01 lhe behavioural-
objectives model. The lrish ¡oumal of Educalion, 22, 2, 66-90.
Eisner, E. W. (1979). The educalional imagina/ion. New York: MacmiUan.
Ellis, J. A (1999). Letler to lhe Editor. Newsweek, September 27, p. 15.
•
References
281
FlaveU, J. (1979). Melacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive-
developmental inquiry. American Psychologisl, 34, 906-911.
Frymier, J. (1996). Accountability in education: Still an evolving coneepl. Bloomington, IN:
Phi Delta Kappa Educational Foundation.
Fursl, E. J. (1981). Bloom's taxonomy 01 educational objectives lor the cognitive domain:
Philosophical and educalionaJ issues. Review ofEduealional Research, 51, 441-453.
Gandal, M. (1996). Making standards matter. Washington, OC: American Federationol
Teachers.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K J. (1980). Analogical problem solving. Cognitive Psychology,
12,306-355.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and analogical transler. Cognitive
Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Ginther, J. R (1972). A radieallook at beluIvioral objeelives. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of lhe American Educational Research Association, Chicago, April, 1972.
Glatlhorn, A A (1998). Performance assessment ond standards-based curricula: The achiere-
ment cyde. Larchmont, NY: Eye on Education.
,---J Hal.dyna, T. M. (1997) Wri/ing tesl ilems /0 evaluale higher order think:ing. Boston: AlIyn &
Bacon.
HaUey, J. M. (1999). l.eHer lo lhe Editor. Newsweek, Septernber 27, p . 15.
Hambleton, R K. (1996). Advances in assessment models, methods, and practices. In D.
C. Berliner & R C. Callee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psyeluIlogy (pp. 899-925).
New York: Macrnillan.
Hannah, L. S., & Michaelis, J. U. (1977). A comprehensive framework for ins/rue/ional objee-
lives: A guide to syslemalicplanningandevalualion.Re.ding.MA: Addison-Wesley.
Hacrow, A (1972). A taxonomy of the psyclwmolor domain: A guide for developing behaviaral
objeclives. New York: David McK.y.
Hauenstein, A D. (1998). A coneeplual framework for educational objeelives: A holislic
approach to traditional taxonomies. Lanham, MD: University Press of Ameríca.
Hirst, P. H. (1974). Knowledge and the eurrieulum: A eolleelion ofphilosophical papers.
London: RoutlOOge & Kegan Pau!.
Jackson, P. W. (1968). Lije in c1assrooms. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Wmston.
Joyce, B " and Weil, M. (1996). Models of leaching (5lh oo.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-HaLL
Kappel, F. R (1960). Vilality in a business enlerprise. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Keil, E (1998). Cognitive science and the origins of thought and knowledge. In W.
Damon (Series Ed.) & R Lemer (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychoÚJgy: Vol. 1.
Theore/ical madel. ofhuman development 5lh oo. (pp. 341-413). New York: Wiley.
Kelly, AV. (1989). The curriculum: Theory and praclice (3rd ed.). London: Pau! Chapman
Publishers.
-o .
-'-'/Kendall, J. S., & Marzano, R J. (1996). Con/ent knowledge. Aurora, CO: Mid-Continent
Regional EducationaJ Laboratory.
Klopler, L. E. (1971). Evaluation of le.ming in science.1n B. S. Bloom, J. T. Hastings &
G. E Madaus (Eds.), Handbook on formalive and summative evalualion of sludenl leam-
ing (pp. 561-641). New York: McGraw-HilL
Kralhwoh1, D. R. (1964). The taxonomy 01 educational objectives: Its use in curricu!um
building. In C. M. Lindvall (Ed.), Defining edueational objeelives (pp. 19-36). Pitls-
burgh: University 01 Pittsburgh Press.
Kralhwoh1, D. R (1994). Reflections on lhe taxonorny: lts past, present, and future. In
L. W. Anderson & L. A. Sosniak (Eds.), Bloom's laxonomy: Aforly-year retrospective,
Ninety-third Yearbook 01 lhe National Society lor the Study of Education (pp.
181-202). Chicago: University 01 Chicago Press.
282 References
Kralhwohl, D. R, Bloom, B. S., & Masia, B. B. (1964). Taxonomy of educational objectives,
the C/assiftcation of Educational Goals; Handbook JI: The alfective doltUlin. New York:
David MeKay.
Kralhwohl, D. R, & Payne, D. A (1971). DefuUng and assessing edueational objectives.
In R L. Ihorndike (Ed.), Educational measurement (pp. 17-45). Washington, OC:
American Council on Education.
Lambert, N. M., & McCombs, B. L. (Eds.). (1998). How students leam: Reforming schools
through leamer-based education. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Levy; C. M., & Ransdell, S. (Eds.). (1996). 17Ie science of writing. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lewy, A, & Balhory, Z. (1994). !he taxonomy oi educational objectives in continental
Europe, Ihe Mediterranean, and Ihe Middle East. In L.W. Anderson & L. A Sos-
niak (Eds.), Bloom's taxonomy: Aforty-year retrospective, Ninety-tltird Yearbook oi Ihe
National Society for Ihe Study of Education (pp. 146-163). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Mager, R F. (1962). Preparing instructional objectives. Palo Alto, CA: Fearon Press.
Mandler, J. (1998). Representation. In W. Damon (Series Ed.), D. Kuhn & R Siegler
(Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. CognitiDn, perceptiDn, and language 51h
ed. (pp. 255-3(8). New York: Wtley.
Manzo, K. K. (1999). !he state of curriculum. Education Week, May 19, 21-26, 28.
Marsh, C. (1992). Key concepts in understanding curriculum. London: Ihe Falmer Press.
Marshal!, H. H. (Ed.). (1996). Recent and emerging Iheoretical frameworksfor research'
on classroom learning: Contributions and limitations. Educational Psychologist,
31(3 & 4), 147-240.
Mayer, R E. (1992). Thinking, problem solving, and cognitiDn (2nd ed.). New York:
Freeman.
Mayer, R E. (1995). Ieaching and testing ior problem solving. In L. W. Anderson (Ed.),
International encye/apedio of teoching ond teacher education, 2nd ed. (pp. 4728-4731).
Oxford, UK: Pergamon.
~ Mayer, R E. (1999). The promise of educotional psychology: Leaming in the content oreos.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Mayer, RE., & Wittrock, M. C. (1996). Problem-solving transler. In D. C. Berliner &
R C. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 47-62). New York:
Macmillan.
McGuire, C. (1963). A process approach to Ihe construction and analysis 01 medical
examinations. !oumal of Medical Education, 38, 556-563.
McKeough, A, Lupart, J., & Marini, A (Eds.). (1995). Teoching for tronsfer. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Metfessel, N. S., Michae!, W. G., & Kirsner, D. A (1969). Instrumentation 01 Bloom'.
and Krathwohl's taxonomies for Ihe writing 01 educationa! objectives. Psychology
in the Schools, 6,227-231.
Moore, W. R, & Kennedy , L. D. (1971). Evaluation of learning in the language arls. In B.
S. Bloom, J. I. Hasting. & G. F. Madaus (Eds.), Handbook on foTltUltive ond summotive
evalUlltion of sludent leaming (pp. 399-446). New York: McGraw-HiU.
Mosenlhal, P. B. (1998). DefuUng prose task characteristics for use in computer-
adaptive testing and instruction. American Educational Research !ournol, 35, 269-307.
National Council lor Ihe Social Studies. (1994). Curriculum stondards for social studies:
Expectations of <xcel1ence. Washington, OC: Aulhor.
National Council oi Ieachers of English and Intemational Reading As.ociation. (1996).
Standards for the English longuoge orts. Urbana, IL: Aulhor.
National Counci! of Ieachers 01 Malhematics. (1989). Curriculum ond evaluation stan-
dards for teaching ltUl/hematics. Reston, VA: Aulhor.
References 283
National Research Counci!. (1996). NatWnal science educa/iDn standards. Washington, OC:
National Academy Press.
Nickerson, R, Perkins, D., & Smilh, E. (1985). The teaching of thinking. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Orlandi, L. R. (1971). Evaluation 01 leaming in secondary school social sludies. In B. S.
Bloom, J. I. Hastings & G. F. Madaus (Eds.), Handbook on foTltUltive and summative
evaluation of student learning (pp. 449-498). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Paris, S., Lipson, M., & Wixson, K. (1983). Becoming a strategic reader. Contemporory
EducatiDnal Psychology, 8, 293-316.
Paris, S., & Winograd, P. (1990). How metacognition can promote academic leaming
and instruction. In B. F. Jones & L. Idol (Eds.), Dimensions of thinking and cognitive
instrue/ion (pp. 15-51). Hillsdale, N): Erlbaum.
Paul, R, & Nosich, G. M. (1992). A model for Ihe national assessment of higher arder think-
ing. Santa Rosa, CA: Foundation for Critica! Thinking. (ERIC Document Reproduc-
tion Semce No. ED 353 296)
Phye, G. D. (Ed.). (1997). Handbook of elassroom assessment. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Pintrich, P. R, & Schrauben, B. (1992¡: Students' motivational beliel. and Iheir cognitive
engagement in classroom tasks. In D. Schunk & J. Meece (Eds.), Slud."t perceptions
in lhe c/assroom: Causes ond consequences (pp. 149-183). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pintrich, P. R, & Schunk, D. H. (1996). MotivatiDn in education: 17Ieory, research, and appli-
cations. Englewood Cliff., NJ: MerriU Prentice-Hall.
'-7 Pintrich, P. R , Wolters, c., & Baxter, G. (in press). Assessing metacognition and self-
regulated leaming. In G. Schraw (Ed.), Metacognitive assessmenl. LineoIn, NE:
University oí Nebraska Press.
Popham, W. J. (1969). Objectives and instruction. In W. J. Popham, E. W. Ei.ner, H. J.
SuUivan & 1. L. Iyler, InstructiDnol objectives (pp. 32-52). American Educational
Research Association Monograph Series on Curriculum Evaluation, No. 3. Chicago:
Rand McNally.
Postlelhwaite, I. N. (1994). Validity vs. utility: Personal experiences wilh Ihe taxonomy.
In L. W. Anderson & L. A Sosniak (Eds.), Bloom 's taxonomy: Aforty-year retrospec-
tive, Ninety-third Yearbook of Ihe National Society ior Ihe Study 01 Education
(pp. 174-180). Chicago: University oi Chicago Press.
Pressley, M., & Van Meter, P. (1995). Memory: Teaching and assessing. In L. W. Ander-
son (Ed.), International encyelopedia of teaching and teacher educatiDn (pp. 439-444).
Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press.
---'"7Press!ey, M., & Woloshyn, V. (1995). Cognitive strategy instruclion that real/y impraves
children's acodemic peiformonce. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books.
Rebarber, I. (1991). Accountobility in educatiDn. Paper presented at Ihe Nationa! Confer-
ence 01 State Legislatures, Washington, OC.
Rohwer, W. D. Jr., & Sloane, K. (1994). Psychological perspectives. In L. W. Anderson &
1. A Sosniak (Eds.), Bloom's taxonomy: A forty-yeor retrospeetive, Ninety-Ihird Year-
book of the Nalional Society for Ihe Study 01 Education (pp. 41-63). Chicago:
University oi Chicago Press.
Royer, J. M., Ciscero, C. A, & CarIo, M. S. (1993). Iechniques and procedures lor assess-
ing cognitive skills. Review of Educationol Research, 63, 201-243.
Rugg, H. (1926a). Curriculum-rnaking and Ihe scientific study 01 education since 1910.
In H. Rugg (Ed.), Twenty-sixth yearbook of the National Society for the Sludy of Educa-
tion, Parl 1. Bloomington, IL: Public Schools Publishing Company.
Rugg, H., et al. (1926b). !he loundations 01 curriculum-malcing. In H. Rugg (Ed.),
Tiventy-sixth yearbook of lhe Notionol Society for the Study of Education, Part 11. Bloom-
ington, IL: Public Schools Publishing Company.
284 References
Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. London: Hutchinson.
~ ,/Schneider, w., & Pressley, M. (1997). Memory development between two and twenty.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Scriven, M. (1967). The melhodology 01 evaluation. In R. E. Stake et al. (Eds.) Perspec-
tives on curriculum evaluation. AERA Monograph Series on Curriculum Evaluation,
No. 1. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Seddon, G. M. (1978). The properties 01 Bloom's taxonomy 01 educational objectives lor
Ihe cognitive dornain. Review of Educational Research, 48, 303-323.
Shane, H. G. (1981). Significant writings Ihat have influenced Ihe curriculum: 1906-8l.
Phi Delta Kappan, 63,311-314.
Shulman, L. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations 01 the new relorm. Harvard
Educational Review, 57,1-22.
Simpson, B. J. (1966). The c1assification 01 educational objectives: Psychomotor domain.
Illinois ¡oumal ofHome Economics, 10 (4), llG-144.
~ P Slotta, J., Chi, M., & Joram, E. (1995). Assessing students' misc1assifications 01 physics
concepts: An ontological basis for conceptual change. Cognition and Instruction, 13,
373-400.
Smilh, E. R., & Tyler, R. W. (1942). Appraising and recording student progress. New York:
Harper.
--"(Smilh, M. U. (Ed.). (1991). Toward a unijied lheory ofproblem solving: Views from the content
domains. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. ' . ~_. -
-
Snow, R, Como, L., & Jackson, D. (1996). Individual differences in affective and cogni-
tive functions. In D. Berliner & R. Callee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology
(pp. 243-310). New York: Macmillan.
Sosniak, L. A. (1994). The Taxonomy, curriculum and Iheir relations. In L. W. Anderson &
L. A. Sosniak (Eds.), Bloom's taxonomy: Aforty-year retrospective, Ninety-third Year-
book 01 Ihe National Society lor Ihe Study 01 Education (pp. 103-125). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Steffe, L. P., & Gale, J. (Eds.). (1995). Constructivism in education. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stenhouse, L. A. (1970-1971). Sorne lirnitations 01 Ihe use 01 objectives in curriculum
research and planning. Pedagogia Europaea.
Stemberg, R. (1985). Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory ofhuman intelligence. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Stemberg, R. J. (1997). Intelligence and lilelong leaming: What's new and how can we
use it? American Psychologist, 52,1134-1139.
Stemberg, R. J. (1998). PrincipIes 01 teaching lor successful intelligence. Educational
Psychologist, 33, 65-72.
Tennyson, R. D. (1995). Concept leaming: Teaching and assessing. In L. W. Anderson
(Ed.), International encyelapedia of teaching and teacher education 2d ed. (pp. 457-463).
Oxlord, UK: Pergamon Press.
Thorndike, R. M., Cunningham, G. K., Thorndike, R. L., & Hagen, E. P. (1991). Measure-
ment and evaluation in psychology and education (51h ed.). New York: Macmillan.
Tyler, R. W. (1949). Basic principIes of curriculum and instruction. Chicago: University 01
Chicago Press.
U.S. Department 01 Education. (1994). Goals 2000: A world elass education for every child.
Washington, DC: Aulhor.
Vosniadou, S., & Ortony, A. (Eds.). (1989). Similarity and analogical reasoning. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Weinstein, C. E., & Mayer, R. (1986). The teaching 01 leaming strategtes. In M. wlttrock
(Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching 3rd ed. (pp. 315-327). New York: Macmillan.
References 285
Wellman, H., & Gelman, S. (1998). Knowledge acquisition in loundational dom.ins. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.), D. Kulm & R. Siegler (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychol-
ogy: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception & language 5th ed. (pp. 523-573). New York: Wiley.
,. ,Wiggins, G., & McTighe, J. (1998). Understanding by designo Alexandria, VA: Association
for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Wilson, B. G. (1971). Evaluation 01 leaming in art education. In B. S. Bloom, J. T. Hast-
ings & G. F. Madaus (Eds.), Handbook of formative and summative evalualion of student
learning (pp. 499-598). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Wilson, J. W. (1971). Evaluation 01 leaming in secondary school rnalhematics. In B. S.
Bloom, J. T. Hastings & G. F. Madaus (Eds.), Handbook of formative and summative
evaluation of student learning (pp. 643-696). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Zimmerman, B. J., & Schunk, D. H. (Eds.) (1997). Self-regulated learning: From teaching lo
self-reflective practice. New York: Guilford Press.
Credits
Chapter 8, Attachment A From Nutrition Mission, A Nutrition Education Unít for
Grades 1-3 by Linda Lynch and Sheila Kelley, 1993. Reprinted by permission of
Current, !ne.
Chapter 13, Altachment A "Brandywine School Distriet Intennediate Writ-
ing Criteria." Brandywine School Distriet, New Castle County , Delaware.
Reprinted with permission. Altachment B From Macmillan!Mcgraw-Hill Perfor-
mance Assessment Handbook, Levels 8-9, p. 45. Altachment e "Revision and
Editing Cheeklist" from Delaware Department of Edueation. Copyright ©
Delaware Department of Edueation. Reprinted with permission. Attachment
D "Primary Trait Scoring Report Writing" by Christine Evans, Brandywine
School Distriet, Delaware. Reprinted by permission of the author.
287
Index
A
Abstraet knowledge, 5, 51, 272, 275
Abstraetions (knowledge of), 273
Aeeountability programs, 19, 248
Activities. See Instruetional aetivities
u Aetivity-driven" planning, 113
Addition Facls vignette, 111, 116, 158-170
assessOlentin, 116, 165-167, 248
instruclional aetivities in, 159-165, 242, 255
links to TaxonoOly Table, 238-239, 242
nlisaligtlDlent in, 169,250
AJIective,258, 259, 269
AligtlDlent, 206
in Addition Faets vignette, 169
of assesSOlents with objectives, 249-252
final check on, 254-255
generalizations related to, 249-255
of instruetional aetivities with assesSD1ents,
252-254
of instruetional aetivities with objectives,
254-255
in Macbeth vignette, 148-149
nlis- (See MisaligtlDlent)
in Nutrition vignette, 130-131
in ParliaOlentary Acts vignette, 184
in Report Writing vignette, 225-226
in TaxonoOly Table, 10, 117, 255, 256
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 205-206
Analyzingl analysis, 5, 30, 31, 79-83, 263, 267,
275--276
applying VS., 34
critieal thinking and, 269
distinguishing differenees as part oI, 7, 8, 10
in Macbeth vignette, 141, 143, 145, 147, 148
in Nutrition vignette, 123, 125, 126, 130,
131
of others' work by teachers, 96-97
in ParliaOlentary Aets vignette, 177, 234
prior learning and, 106
in Report Writing vignette, 211, 215, 216,
217,218,222, 224,225, 226
tiOle deOlands of, 257
understanding VS., 123
in Voleanoes? Here? vignette, 193, 234
Applying/ application, 5, 30, 31, 77-79, 233,
263,267,275
in Addition Faets vignette, 159, 163, 164,
168,169,170
ana1yzing VS. , 34
eontextualized eognitive process and, 91
in ParliaOlentary Aets vignette, 172, 174,
176,181,184
in Report Writing vignette, 211, 215--219,
222,224,225,226
understanding and, 269
in Voleanoes? Here? vignette, 197-207,
239
Assessment, 89. See also Perfonnanee asseSSOlent
in Addition Faets vignette, 116, 165-167
authentie, 88
and constructivist learning, 65
contextuallzed cognitive process and,
91
educational objectives and, 15, 19-20
external, 233, 247-249, 253
focused VS. distributed, 101
2811
290 Index
Assessment (continue d)
formal vs. informal, 130, 169, 203, 222, 225, 226,
245
formative vs. sununative, 101-102 (See also For-
mative assessment; Summative assessment)
global objectives and, 19-20
"high stakes," 248
instructional activities aligned with, 128,
132, 233, 242-244,252-254
in Macbeth vignette, 143-148,253
of metacognitive knowledge objectives, 60-62
in Nutrition vignette, 115, 127-130,
252-253
objectives aligned with, 10, 233, 249-251
in Parliamentary Acts yjgnette, 116,
179-184,248, 252
in Report Writing vignette, 221-225, 248
validity of, 96, 247, 249, 251
in Volcanoes? Here? yjgnette, 194, 201-205, 206,
247, 255
"Assessment conversation," 198,200,205,206,
207,246
Assessment tasks
instructional activities and, 252-253
mathematics example of, 22
prototypical, 247
Attributing, 14, 31,74,79,82-83,96
classifying vs., 131
interpreting VS., 82
in Macbeth yjgnette, 141, 143
in Nutrition yjgnette, 123, 131
organizing and, 81
remembering VS. , 34
B
Behavior
behaviorism VS. , 13-14
cognitive process VS., 12, 13-14
educational objectives and, 16
verbs associated with undesirable, 107
Behayjorist view, 40, 43
e
Categorizing (knowledge of categories), 7, 8, 10,
27,29, 48, 49-50, 72-73
in Addition Facts yjgnette, 116
classifying and, 14
factual knowledge vs., 49
knowledge oi terminology VS. , 194
in Nutrition vignette, 114, 236
of objectives, 34-36
in original version oí taxonomy , 273
principIes and generalizations in, 51
in Report Writing vignette, 216, 218, 226-227
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 194
Cause-and-effect models, 14, 75-76, 172, 191, 194
Checking, 31, 36, 83-84
in Nutrition vignette, 119, 120
Classifying (knowledge of classifications), 7, 8, 10,
14,27, 29, 30, 31,48,49-50,72-73
attributing VS. , 131
factual knowledge VS. , 49
generating and, 86
mis-,49-50, 104
in Nutrition vignette, 116, 120, 122, 123, 130,
131
ofobjectives, 22,34-36, 105-107, 105-109, 114
in original version of taxonom y, 273
principIes and generalizations in, 51
in Volcanoes? Here? yjgnette, 195, 197
Cognition
knowledge about, 27, 29, 43, 44, 55 (See also
Metacognitive knowledge)
meta- (See Metacognitive knowledge)
motivation and, 59
Cognitive complexity, 5, 234-235
in Addition Facts yjgnette, 170
conceptual knowledge and, 27
evaluation and, 234-235
instructional activities and, 239
in Mtlcbeth vignette, 148, 149
metacognitive knowledge and, 235, 239
in Parliamentary Acts yjgnette, 234
prior learning and, 106
problem solv;ng and, 235
in Report Writing vignette, 226
transfer and, 232, 235
and types of knowledge, 238
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 234
Cognitive process, 5, 23, 38, 39, 43, 44, 63-92,
267-268
behavior VS., 12, 13-14
knowledge and, 35, 107-108,232, 233, 23S-241,
256
in original Handbook, 265-266
remembering as (See Remembering)
retention vs. transfer in, 63-64
subject matter and, 88
Taxonomy Table and, 116, 118
Cognitive psychology, 14, 27, 40, 41
declarative knowledge in, 41-42
metacognitive knowledge and, 44
models in, 48, 258
Cognitive science, 14, 40
Cognitive tasks, knowledge about, 44, 56, 57-59,
61
Comparing, 30, 31, 75
in Addition Facts vignette, 161, 162
differentiating VS., 80
generating and, 86
in Macbeth vignette, 137, 140, 151
in Volcanoes? Here? yjgnette, 190, 206,
235
Comprehension, 263, 266, 267, 269, 274
Conceptual knowledge, 5, 27, 29, 34, 41,
4S-52, 233
in Addition Facts vignette, 161, 162, 163,
164,168,169,170,237
analyzing, 9, 10
contextuaHzed cognitive process and, 89,
90,91
critical thinking and, 269
factual VS. , 41-42, 45, 170
in Mtlcbeth vignette, 40, 137, 139, 140, 141, 143,
145, 147,149, 237, 239
in Nutrition vignette, 114, 115, 120, 122, 123,
126, 128, 130, 131
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 116, 172,
174, 176, 177,178,179,181,183,184,185,
234, 237
procedural VS. , 52-53
in Report Writing vignette, 211, 213-217,
219-227, 237
subtypes oí, 49-52
and transfer oí learning, 42
understanding, 239 (See also
Understanding)
understanding of, 35, 42, 50, 77
Index 291
in Volcanoes? Here? yjgnette, 190, 191, 194, 195,
196-205, 207, 234,237
"Conceptual restructuring," 190, 234, 250
Constructivist perspective, 38, 41, 43, 65
Content
defined,12
educational objectives and, 16
instructional objectives and, 16
knowledge VS., 12-13, 39-40
objectives and, 12
"packaging" of, 13
subject matter, 12, 13
Content knowledge, 12, 19, 27, 41
Content standards, 19
Cont~nt validity; 252
Contextual knowledge, 27, 29, 41, 57-59
Contextualized cognitive process, 88-89
Creating, 5, 30, 31, 84-88
cognitive complexity and, 235
contextualized cognitive process and, 91
critical thinking and, 270
implementing and, 78
in Macbeth yjgnette, 141, 142, 145, 147, 148,
149
metacognitive knowledge and, 60
in Nutrition vignette, 119, 120, 126, 128,
130
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 172, 178,
181,184,234
in Report Writing vignette, 213, 214, 219, 221,
222, 225, 226
synthesis VS ., 263, 266-268
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 203, 205, 234
Criteria (knowledge oí), 27, 29, 52
evaluating based on, 83, 96
ID Macbeth vignette, 143, 145, 151, 235
in original version of taxonomy, 273, 277
procedural knowledge and, 54-55
Critical thinking, 269-270, 270
Critiquing, 31, 36, 83, 84
Cultural knowledge, 44, 58, 59
Curriculum
"latent," 240
standards-based, 19
state standards for, 247-248 (See also State
standards/ testing)
i ~
I
1
f
292 Index
Curriculum (continuedJ
teachers as makers vs. implementers of, 10-11
textbook-based, 7
Curriculum developers, global objectives for, 15
Curriculum units, 111-112
instructional units and, 112
integrative, 112
interdisciplinary,112
vignettes and, 112
Currriculum units, vignettes ando See Vignettes
D
Differentiating, 31, 79, 80-81
contextualized cognitive process and, 90
Domain knowledge, 41
Domain specificity, 41
E
Educational objectives, 1-3, 15--16,23,39. Su also
Objectives
assessment instruments and, 19-20
cognitive processes and, 18
cornmunity endorsement of, 22
content standards and, 19
curriculum units and, 111-112
debate about, 20-21
example of context in, 89-91
examples of content standards as, 19
examples of specificity in, 16
expressive outcomes and, 21
and factual vs. conceptual knowledge, 42
instructional objectives VS., 19
knowledge and, 18, 265
in original version of taxonomy, 271-271
specificity of, 105, 242
in standards-based curriculum, 19
state standards and, 18
transfer and, 63
Evaluating/evaluation, 5, 30, 31, 83--84, 263, 267,
268
analyzing and, 80
cognitive complexity and, 234-235
contextualized cognitive process and, 91
critical thinking and, 270
in Macbeth vignette, 142, 147
in Nutrition vignette, 119, 120, 125-126,
127, 128, 130
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 116, 172,
174,179,183,184, 185,186,234
in Report Writing vignette, 216, 219, 225,
226
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 234
VS. evaluation in original version of taxonomy,
263, 268
of knowledge of techniques, 53
of metacognitive knowledge, 237
in Nutrition vignette, 114, 122
Executing, 30,31,36, 77-78
contextualized cognitive process and, 90
implementing VS., 99, 101, 102
prior learning and, 106
Exemplifying, 30, 31, 71-72
generating and, 86
identifying and, 107
in Macbeth vignette, 139, 140, 141
in Nutrition vignette, 114, 122, 130
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 178
Expertise,41,42,49-SO,58
Experts, 30, 42
classifications/ categories and, 49
factual knowledge and, 47
generalizations and, 51
procedural knowledge of, 52, 54
Explaining, 14,30, 31,36,75--76,267
contextualized cognitive process and, 90
different meanings of, 96
generating and, 86
in Macbeth vignette, 143
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 172
remembering VS., 249
understanding and, 269
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 190, 194
Expressive outcomes, 21, 23
External assessments, 233, 247-249, 253
F
Factual knowledge, 5, 8, 27, 29, 34, 41, 45--48, 233
in Addition Facts vignette, 117, 159, 161, 165,
168,239
assessment of, 247
conceptual vS., 41-42, 45,170
contextuaIized cognitive process and, 89, 90, 91
in Macbeth vignette, 39-40, 137, 141, 142, 145,
148
metacognitive knowledge and, 61
in Nutrition vignette, 122, 123, 125, 131
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 116, 172, 174,
175, 177, 178, 181, 184, 185
procedural VS., 52-53
remembering, 8, 9, 239 (See also Remembering)
in Report Writing vignette, 213, 214, 219, 221,
222,225,226
types of, 45-48
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 194, 196-207,
247
vs. knowledge of classifications and categories,
49
Formal assessment, 169, 203
misaJignrnent and, 250
in Report Writing vignette, 130, 222, 225,
226
summative assessment as, 245
Formative assessment, 101-102, 184, 233, 245-249
in Nutrition vignette, 130
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 205, 246 (See also
11 Assessrnent conversation")
G
Generalizations (knowledge of), 27, 29, 51, 52, 73,
273
in Addition Facts vignette, 159
in original version of taxonomy, 274
Generating, 31, 36, 85, 86--87
contextualized cognitive process and, 91
in Macbeth vignette, 139
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 203
Global objectives (Goals), 12, 15, 20
assessment instruments and, 19-20
community endorsement of, 22
expressive outcomes and, 21
instructional objectives VS., 16, 17
mathematies example of, 18
specific vs., 16, 17, 19
state standard s and, 18, 19
Goals 2000, 15, 37
Index 293
H
liandbook, 15-16, 20,23,35,257
criticism of, 258
evaluating discussed in, 234-235
metacognitive knowledge and, 44, 45
multiple-choice format in, 258
"templates" in, 35
I
Implementing, 30, 31, 36, 74, 77. See also Using
cheeking and, 83
eomparing.and, 75
creating and, 78
executing vs., 77, 99, 101, 102
in Nutrition vignette, 130
prior learning and, 106
procedural knowledge and, 78-79
understanding and, 78
"Indicators," 18-19
Inferring, 30, 31, 36, 73-75
assessment and, 74-75, 96
comparing and, 75
generating and, 86
in Macbeth vignette, 140, 142
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 177
strategies for, 57
in Volcanoes? H ere? vignette, 197, 198
Informal assessment, 169, 203
formative assessment as, 245
in Report Writing vignette, 130, 222, 225, 226
Information, specialized and technical, 274-277
Information processing models, 55
Inslantiating, 72
Instruction, 30
addressing long-standing problems in, 232-259
for different VS. similar objectives, 8
Taxonomy Table and, 7--8, 11, 110
time and (See Classroom/instruclionaJ time)
Instruetional activilies
in Addition Faets vignette, 159-165, 242, 255
assessment and, 233, 242-244, 253-254
cognitive complexity and, 239
curriculum units and, 112-114
for different vs. similar objectives, 8
educational objectives and, 15
I
j
294 Index
lnstructional activities (continued)
learning and, 244
in Macbeth vignette, 137, 139, 148, 242, 243, 253,
255
in Nutrition vignette, 12G--127, 128, 242, 252,
255
objectives aligned with, 233, 252
objectives inferred from, 245
objectives linked with, 242, 244, 257
objectives VS., 17, 18,96,106-107,132,206-207,
233,241-245
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 174-179, 242,
252
performing vs. learning from, 233
purpose and, 21, 233
in Report Writing vignette, 213-221, 242
Taxonomy Table and, 7-8, 11, 96, 99-101, 103,
104, 117, 118
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 191-201, 207, 242
lnstructional materials, 13, 112, 113
lnstructional objectives, 15, 16
cornmunity endorsement of, 22
curriculum units and, 112
debate about, 2G--21
expressive outcomes and, 21
standards-based curriculurns and, 19
state standards and, 18
vs. global objectives, 16, 17
lnstructional units. See aLso CurricuJum units
contextualized cognitive process and, 91
cross-d.isciplinary, 184-185
curriculum units and, 112
educational objectives and, 19
integrated, 184
objectives for lessons VS., 19
and objectives vs. completion of activities,
206-207
planning, 277
Taxonomy Table and, 105
vignettes for (See Vignettes)
lnstructional validity , 247, 252, 253
lntegrating, 81
lntellectual abilities/skills, 274-277
lntent, 107
attributing, 14, 96
objectives and, 23
standards and, 18
teaching and, 3
Interpreting, 30, 31,70-71
attributing VS., 82
contextualized cognitive process and, 89, 90
in Macbeth vignette, 139, 145
in original version of taxonomy, 275
understanding and, 269
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 190
K
Knowledge, 5, 23, 38-{i2
about cognition (See Metacognitive knowledge)
aboutcognitivetasks,44,56,57-59,61
abstract vs. concrete, 5 (See also Abstract
knowledge)
of algorithms, 27, 29, 52, 53, 77
of categories (See Categorizing)
choosing varieties of, 236-238
of classifications (See Classifying)
cognitive process and, 35, 232, 233, 238-241
eognitive processes and, 35, 232, 233, 238-241
conceptual (See Conceptual knowledge)
concrete vs. abstrae!, 5 (See aLso Abstractknowl-
edge; Concrete knowledge)
.--\:QJ;t<:\itional, 27, 29, 41, 44, 57-59
content VS., 12-13, 39-40 (See also Content
knowledge)
contextual,27,29,57-59,88-89
of criteria (See Criteria [knowledge of])
cultural, 44, 58, 59
decl. arative,41
~-cle¡¡ned, 13
disciplinary, 41, 42, 48, 53
discourse, 41
domain,41
edueational objectives and, 18, 265
episodic, 41
of epistemologies, 52
explicit,41
factual (See Factual knowledge)
of generalizations, 27, 29,51, 52
"historically shared," 13
#inert," 42
instructional objectives and, 19
"making sense" of, 38, 63, 9G--91
metacognitive (See Metacognitive knowledge)
methods (See Methods [knowledge of])
of models (See Models [knowledge of])
in original Handbook, 265, 271-277
of paradigms, 52
of principies (See Principies [knowledge of])
procedural (See Procedural knowledge)
prbCess related to type of, 107-108, 256
relevant (See Relevant knowledge)
of schemas, 42
scientific (See Science; Scientific knowledge)
seU-, 27,29,43,59-{i0
semantic, 41
situalional, 41, 44, 58
skills, 27, 29, 52, 53
sociocultural,41
of specific elements (See Factual knowledge;
Specific elements/ details [knowledge of])
strategic, 27, 29, 41, 44, 56-67, 135, 138
of strategies (See Strategies [knowledge of])
ofstructures, 27,29,51-52
subject matter content vs., 39-40
tacit, 41
of techniques (See Techniques [knowledge of])
of terminology, 27, 29, 45, 47
of theories (See Theories [knowledge of])
types of, 27-30, 40-{i2, 236-241
Knowledge acquisition, 65
L
Learning,89
active vs. passive view of, 38
activities and, 244
alignmentand,256
assessment and, 233
common vs. idiosyncratic, 21
constructivist, 65
context and, 88
"doing" VS., 244
from expressive outcome activities, 21
global objectives for, 15
grades and, 251
IIhow to learn," 35
incidental, 23 (See also Outcomes, intended vs.
unintended)
meaningfuJ(SeeMeaningfuJlearning)
Index
295
rnotivation and, 59
objectives in, 1-11,21-22
prior, 105-106
process-knowledge relationships and, 240
retention of (See Retention)
rote, 64, 65
situational,55
strategies for, 43, 56
Taxonorny Table and, 97-99, 249
theory of, 258
transfer of (See Transfer)
Lessons
curriculum units and, 112
instructional units and, 112
Lessons (continued)
objectives for units vS., 19
Taxonomy Table and, 105
Logical fallacies, 277
M
Macbeth vignette, 39-40, 111, 116, 136-157
activities vs. objectives in, 243
assessméntin, 143-147,253
gracting in, 251
instructional activities in, 137, 139, 148, 242, 253,
255
links in Taxonomy Table for, 238-239
misalignmentin,149,250,251,253
surnmativ'e assessment in, 246
types of knowledge in other vignettes vs., 236,
237
"Making sense," 38, 63, 9G--91
Mathernatics, 6, 277
adapting Taxonomy Table for, 259
algorithms in, 53
analyzing in, 7
conceptual knowledge and, 7
contextualíZed. eognitive process and, 88, 89
objectives and, 5, 7, 9, 18-19, 22
procedural knowledge and, 54
standards and, 18
Mathematicsexamples, 18-19,22,88-89
Meaningfullearning,38,63,64-65,250
contextualized cognitive process and, 89
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 190, 234
Memory,30,232
I
298 Index
Metaeognitive knowledge, 5, 27, 29, 35, 41,
258-259
in Addition Faets vignette, 159, 164, 168, 169,
170, 237, 239
analyzing and, 239 (See also Analyzing/
anaIysis)
assessing objectives involving, 6O--{j2
eognitive eomplexity and, 235, 239
eontextualized cognitive process and, 89, 90, 91
creating and, 239 (See also Creating)
evaluating and, 239 (See also Evaluating/
evaluation)
in Macbeth vignette, 40, 239
metacognitive control VS., 43
in Nutrition vignette, 120, 125, 130, 237,
39
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 237, 239
procedural knowledge vs., 53
rationale for, 43-44
in Report Writing vignette, 215, 217
subtypes of, 55-56, 61-{j2
teaching, 238
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 237, 239
Methods (evaluation 01), 277
Methods (knowledge 01), 27, 29, 52
in original version of taxonomy, 273, 275
subject-specific, 54
Misalignment, 10, 104,233
in Addition Facts vignette, 169, 250
causes of, 250-251
in Macbeth vignette, 149, 250, 251, 253
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 184, 250,
251,252
in Report Writing vignette, 226, 254
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 250,253
Models
assessment, 247
cause-and-effect, 14, 75-76, 172, 191, 194
eognitive, 43, 48, 55, 59; 258
cultural, 55
explaining and, 76
information processing, 55
knowledge of, 27, 29, 33-34, 42, 51-52
for measuring higher-level thinking, 258
mental,48
of multiple-choice item formats, 258,
264
neo-Piagetian, 55
Piagetian, 41
situationallearning, 55
social cognitive, 59
social constructivist, 43
Tyler, 12, 13-14, 16
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 203
Vygotskian, 55
Monitoring, 43, 55-56, 83, 239
Motivation, 43, 59-{j0
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 196
Multiple-choice item formats, 258, 264
N
Nutrition vignette, 111, 119-135
assessmentin, 115, 127-128, 129,252-253
criteria in, 120, 126, 128, 130, 253
instructional activities in, 120-127, 128, 242, 252,
255
misalignment in, 250
types of knowledge in other vignettes VS., 236,
237
o
Objectives, 1-11
abstract vs. concrete, 250
in accountability programs, 19
in Addition Facts vignette, 158-159, 250
alignment of instruction, assessment, and, lO,
35-36 (See also Alignment)
assessment aligned with, iO, 233, 249-251 (See
also Alignment)
assessment for different vs. similar, 8-9
assessment instrurnents and, 19-20
assessment VS., 17, 18
classUying, 22, 34-36, 105-109, 114
comparing levels of, 16-17
completion of aetivities vs. achievement of,
206-207
complex, 148, 224 (See also Cognitive
complexity)
concrete, 244, 250
consistency among, 35-36
and content vs. knowledge, 12-13
continuum of, 4, 15, 16-17
debate about, 12, 20
difficulty in stating, 22-23
educational (vs. global or instructional), 15,
16-17 (See also Educational objectives)
explicit vs. implicit,3, 12, 17
expressive, 21
external assessment linked with, 249, 251
function of, 16, 17
global (vs. instruetional or educational), 16, 17
(See also Global objecti ves)
inferred from instruetional activities, 245
instructional, 112
instructional activities aligned with, 233 (See
also Alignment; "Alignment question")
instructional activities linked with, 242, 244, 257
instructional aetivities vs., 17, 18, 96, 106-107,
132,206-207,233,241-245
instructional approaches for different vs.
similar, 8
instructional (vs. global or educational), 16, 17
(See also Instructional objectives)
as intentions, 23
in Macbeth vignette, 137, 243, 250
in Nutrition vignette, 119-120,251
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 171-174,250
precise vs. vague, 4, 244
as prerequisites or facilitators, 224
problems with/ criticisms of, 12, 20-23
in Report Writing vignette, 210-213
restrieted use of, 22-23
specific vs. global, 12, 15, 19
specificity of, 12, 15-17, 20-21, 105 (See also
Specificity) .
in standards-based curriculums,-19
stating, 22-23
structure of, 12-14
subject matter standards as, 19
Taxonomy Table and, 5, 6-7, 27, 30-36, 103, 104,
117,118
tests and, 17, 19
Tyler model of, 12, 13-14, 16
for units vs. lessons, 19
vignettes and, 112-113, 115 (See also Vignettes)
lndex
297
vocabulary regarding, 18-20
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 190-191, 207,
250
Orgarrizing, 6,36, 79,81-82
attributing and, 81
cognitive pracess and, 31
eontextualized cognitive process and, 89
differentiating and, 81
experts and, 42
in original version of taxonomy, 272
in Report Writing vignette, 216, 226
Outeomes, 216-217
assessable, 23
cognitive vs. other, 23
explicit, 23
expressive, 21, 23
global objectives and, 15
intended vs. unintended, 21 (See also Learning,
incidental)
learning-based, 23
objectives and, 17, 20-21
standards for, 18
student-oriented, 23
p
Parliamentary Acts vignette, 111, 116,
171-189
assessmentin, 116, 179-183, 248,252
cognitive complexity in, 234
external assessment in, 248
instructional activities in, 174-179, 242,
252
links in Taxonomy Table for, 238-239
misalignment in, 184,250, 251, 252
summative assessment in, 184, 245
typeS of knowledge in other vignettes vs., 236,
237
Performance assessment, 247-248. See also
Assessment
alignment and, 253, 257
edueational objectives and, 15
multiple-choiee item formats and, 258
objectives and, 21-22, 243
Taxonomy Table and, 105
Perspective, 269, 270
"
:1
298 Index
Planning,31,86,87,113
checking and, 83
ofcognition,56
contextualized cognitive process and, 89
models and, 33-34
in Nutrition vignette, 126, 130
in original version of taxonomy, 276-277
in Report Writing vignette, 225
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 207
Precise information, 272
Predicting, 74, 142
PrincipIes (knowledge of), 27, 29, 51, 52, 237
in Addition Facts vignette, 161, 162
in Nutrition vignette, 119, 120
in original version of taxonomy, 274, 275, 276
Problem solving, 41, 44
cognitive complexity and, 235
disciplinary knowledge vs. general, 53
and knowledge of specific details, 49
and meaningfullearning, 65
recalling vs., 249
strategies for, 56, 57, 59
Taxonomy Table and, 104, 269-270
understanding VS., 269-270
Pf(,cegmal knowledge, 5, 27, 29, 34, 41, 52-55, 77,
233
in Addition Facts vignette, 159, 163, 164, 168,
169,170,237
applying, 77, 239 (See also Applying/
application)
contextualized cognitive process and, 89, 90, 91
executing and, 77-78
factual and conceptual VS., 52-53
implementing and, 78-79
Macbeth example of, 40
metacognitive VS., 53
in Nutrition vignette, 120, 128, 130, 237
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 174, 176, 179,
181,184,185,234,237
in Report Writing vignette, 211, 215-219, 222,
224,225,226
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 196--207, 237, 239
Procedures (knowledge of), 273, 275. See also Pro-
cedural Knowledge
Producing, 31, 86, 87~8
contextualized cognitive process and, 89
in Macbeth vignette, 145
in original version of taxonomy, 276--277
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 178
in Report Writing vignette, 213, 214, 219
Proposed set of operations, 276--277
Psychomotor domain, 258, 259
R
Recalling,30,31,57,61,68,69-70
in Addition Facts vignette, 158,242
contextualized cognitive process and, 89, 90, 91
in Nutrition vignette, 123
in original version of taxonomy, 272
prior leaming and, 106
problem solving VS., 249
recognizing VS., 194
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 194
Recognizing,30,31,57,61,68,69
contextualized cognitive process and, 90, 91
identifying as, 107
labeling VS., 143
in Macbeth vignette, 143
in original version of taxonomy, 276
recalling VS., 194
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 194
Reduce-reuse-recycle example of, 33
Regulation, 43, 55-56
self-, 43, 44, 238
Rehearsal, 56--57, 59, 130,238
Relations, abstract, 277
Relationships (analysis of), 276
Relevant knowledge, 30, 43, 44, 64--65, 68
constructivist learning and, 65
generalizations and, 51
in Report Writing vignette, 211, 222, 226
transfer of, 65
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 193, 198
Remembering,5,30,31,65-70,233,266,267
in Addition Facts vignette, 116, 117, 159, 161,
165,168,239
alignment and, 253
attributing VS., 34
contextualized cognitive process and, 90, 91
explaining VS., 249
of factual knowledge, 8, 9
identifying and, 107
Index
299
interpreting VS., 71
in Macbeth vignette, 137, 145, 148
metacognitive knowledge and, 61
in Nutrition vignette, 114, 115, 120, 123, 130,
131
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 116, 171, 172,
175,177,181, 183, 184
prior leaming and, 106
process-knowledge relationship in, 107, 239
recall and (See Recalling)
in Report Writing vignette, 214
retention and, 241 (See also Retention)
transfer and, 63, 241 (See also Transfer)
understanding and, 170
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 194, 196-207,
247
Report Writing vignette, 111, 210--231
assessment in, 221-224, 248
external assessment in, 248
instructional activities in, 213-221, 242
misalignment in, 226, 254
types of knowledge in other vignettes VS., 236,
237
Retention, 63-64, 65, 232
contextualized cognitive process and, 90, 91
Taxonomy Table and, 241
Rotelearning, 64,65
s
Scientific knowledge, 38, 47, 54
Scoring guide, 233
district, 247-248
example of alignment involving, 254
in Nutrition vignette, 135, 235
in Report Writing vignette, 222, 229, 231
Scoring rubrics
alignment and, 253
example of alignment involving, 254
"kid-friendly," 213, 219, 228
in Nutrition vignette, 126, 131-132, 135
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 185
in Report Writing vignette, 213-214, 219, 225,
226,229,231
in Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 201-203, 206, 209,
210,235
Selecting, 80, 210, 211, 216, 222
Self-analysis, by teachers, 95-96
Self-awareness, 55, 59-60
Self-knowledge, 27, 29, 43, 59-60, 61, 269
Self-reflection,55
Self-regulation, 43, 44, 238, 239
Sequences (knowledge of), 273
Situational knowledge, 41, 44, 58
Situationallearning models, 55
Skills/ abilities, 27, 29, 52, 53, 274-277
Sociocultural knowledge, 41
Specific facts (knowledge of), 271-272
Specificity, 12, 15-17, 20-21
assessment and, 21-22
cognitive complexity and, 22
domain,41
of educational objectives, 105, 242
of instructional objectives, 16
Taxonomy Table and, 105
unit-Ievel VS. lesson-Ievel, 19
Standards,3-4
cognitive process and, 30
content (See Content standards)
differences in interpretation of, 249
evaluating based on, 83
original version of taxonomy and, 277
publicly stated, 19
state-Ievel, 6, 18, 247-248
in Tyler'smodel, 14
Standards-based curriculum, 19. See also Content
standards
State standards/testing, 6, 18,247-249
Stimulus-response associations, 14
Strategic knowledge, 27, 29, 41, 44, 56-67, 135,
138,235,238
Strategies (knowledge of), 43, 56-57, 235
for memorizing, 8, 56, 59, 158--170,239,242,
250
metacognitive knowledge and, 239
for problem solving, 56, 57, 59
self-knowledge and, 59-60
Structure
cognitive process and, 30
implicit VS. explicit, 276
of objectives, 12-14
Structures (knowledge of), 27, 29, 51-52
in original version of taxonomy, 273, 274, 276
300 Index
Students, 89
choices of, 149-150
point of view of, 34-35
Subject matter
cognitive process and, 88
as content domain, 12-13
expressive outcomes activities and, 21
generalizations and, 51
global objectives about, 15
"packaged," 13
principies and, 51
procedural knowledge and specific, 53-55
and stating objectives, 22
Subject matter content, knowledge VS., 39-40
Subject matter standards, objectives as, 19
Summarizing, 30, 31, 56,59,73
generating and, 86
in Nutrition vignette, 126
Summative assessment, 101-102, 233,
245-249
in Macbeth vignette, 246
in Nutrition vignette, 130
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 184
in VoJcanoes? Here? vignette, 246
Synthesis, 263, 266, 268, 276
T
Taxonomy of Objectives
adaptation of, 259
alignmentin, 10, 103-104, 117,251-252,255,
256 (See also Alignment)
altemative frameworks for, 259 (See also
Framework)
assessment and, 8-9, 11, 101-102, 102-105,
117,118,247,249,254
cognitive complexity and, 235-236
cognitive process dimension of, 63-92, 265-266,
267-268
condensed original version of, 271-277
contextualized cognitive process and, 91
curriculum and, 11, 241
domains of, 258--259
hierarchy of, 267-268
incJusion of metacognitive knowledge in, 43,
44,258
instructional activities and, 7-8, 11, 99-101, 117,
118
knowledge dimension of, 38--{j2, 265
leaming and, 97-99, 249
motivation in, 59--{j0
need for, 3-5
nouns in, 108--109, 114, 117,266
objectives linked with extemal asséssment in,
249
process-knowledge relationships and, 238
for teachers' analysis of others, 96-97
teachers and, 11, 238--239, 264
for teachers' self-analysis, 95-96
teaching philosophy and, 239
terminology in, 41, 265-266, 269-270
unsolved problems with, 257
using, 95-109, 263-264
verb-noun combination in using, 107, 265
verbs in, 107, 114, 117, 244-245, 266
vignettes to illustrate use of, 110-118 (See also
Vignettes)
Teacher roles, for different vs. similar objectives, 8
Teachers, 89, 243
authority of, 240
communication among, 11
as curriculum makers vs. implementers, 10-11
English, 258
and extemal assessments, 248
as facilitators, 240
global objectives for, 15
ingenuity of, 242
judgment and empowerment of, 20
major concerns of, 117
Taxonomy Table and, 11, 238-239, 264
vignettes written by, 110-118 (See also Vignettes)
Teaching,89
analyzing one's own, 95-96
of different types of knowledge, 238, 240
"missed opportunities" in, 238-239
by modeling, 214, 215, 224
objectives and, 3-4
organizing questions in, 6
philosophy in, 40, 241
process-knowledge relationships and, 240
reasoned and intentional aspects of, 3
-
standards and, 3-4
lito the test," 20, 249
Techniques (knowledge of), 27, 29, 52, 273
examples of, 53
for memorizing, 8
in original version of taxonomy, 276
subject-specific, 54
Terminology
education, 36-37
knowledge of, 27, 29, 45, 47,194
for knowledge types, 41, 265
"popular" or "foIk/" 47
in Taxonomy Table, 41, 265-266, 269-270
Testing
alignment and, 253
for complex behaviors, 258
for higher-Ievel thinking, 258
of hypotheses, 277
metacognitive knowledge and, 44, 59, 83
statewide, 233, 247-248, 249
Tests
fill-in-the-blank,258
litigation and, 19
in Macbeth vignette, 155-157
multiple-choice, 258, 264
objectives and, 17, 19
sample items on, 258
Theories (knowledge of), 27, 29, 42, 48, 51-52,
237
implicit, 50
in original version of taxonomy, 273, 274,
275
in VoJcanoes? Here? vignette, 191
Thinking
context and, 88
critical, 269-270
higher-Ievel, 258
inductive vs. deductive, 57
in Nutrition vignette, 123, 125, 130
strategies for, 56, 57
"Thinking aloud," 214, 215
Time
analysis and, 257
cJassroom/instructional (See Classroom/
instructional time)
Index 301
knowledge of trends and sequences with re-
spect to, 273
objectives and, 16, 17
Transfer, 42, 63-64, 65, 232
contextualized cognitive process and, 90, 91
and meaningfullearning, 65
Taxonomy Table and, 241
Translation, 86, 274-275
Trends (knowledge of), 273, 275
u
Understanding, 5, 30, 31, 70-76, 233
in Addition Facts vignette, 158--164, 168, 169,
170
aJignmentand,253
analyzing and, 80, 123
applying and, 77
attributing vs., 82
comprehension vs., 263, 266, 267, 269, 274
of conceptual knowledge, 35, 42, 50, 77
contextualized cognitive process and, 91
creating and, 78
critical thinking vs., 269-270, 270
differentiating vs., 80
experts and, 42
generating and, 86
identifying and, 107
implementing and, 78
in Macbeth vignette, 116, 137, 139-143, 145, 147,
148,149,239
in Nutrition vignette, 114, 115, 119, 120, 122,
123, 125, 130, 131
of objectives, 4, 5, 6-10
in Parliamentary Acts vignette, 116, 172, 174,
. 176,177, 178, 181, 183, 184, 234
problem solving vS., 269-270, 270
process-knowledge relationship in, 107,239
remembering and, 170
in Report Writing vignette, 214
in VoJcanoes? Here? vignette, 190, 191, 194, .195,
196-205,207,234,247
Units. See Curriculum units; Instructional units
Using, 38,63,90-91. See also Implementing
objectives, 16, 17,22-23
in Report Writing vignette, 216
302 Index
Using (continued)
Taxonomy Table, 95-109
transfer and, 63
v
Validity
of assessment, 96, 251
content, 252
of external assessments, 249
instructional, 247, 252, 253
of logical statements, 57
Values,59
attributing, 14
and stating objectives, 22
Taxonomy Table and, 241
Vignettes. See also Addition Facts vignette;
Macbeth vignette; Nutrition vignette;
Parliamentary Acts vignette; Report Writing
vignette; Volcanoes? Here? vignette
analyzing, 114-117
assessment and, 112-113, 115
central components of, 112-114
characterization of, 110-112
cornmentaries on, 118
instructional activities and, 112-114, 115
objectives and, 112-113, 115
organization and structure of, 117-118
purpose of, 110, 118
Volcanoes? Here? vignette, 110, 111, 190--209
assessmentin,194,201-204,206,247,255
(See also "Assessment conversation")
cognitive complexity in, 234
formative assessment in, 205, 247 (See also
11 Assessment conversation")
instructional activities in, 191-201, 207,
242
links in Taxonomy Table for, 238--239
misalignment in, 250, 253
summative assessment in, 246, 247
types of knowledge in other vignettes vs.,
236,237