Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Video
 
Audio
 
Software
 
Images
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
About Blog Events Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer
Full text of "How We Think"
See other formats
HOW  WE  THINK 


A  RESTATEMENT  OF  THE  RELATION 
OF  REFLECTIVE  THINKING  TO 
THE  EDUCATIVE  PROCESS 

BY 

JOHN  DEWEY 

PROPESaoR  EMERITUS  OP  PHILOSOPHY 
COLUMBIA  UNIVERSITY 


D.  G.  HEATH  AND  COMPANY 


BOSTON 


Copyright,  1033, 
By  John  Dewey 


lijTo  part  of  the  material  covered  by  thie 
I’copyright  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  written  permission  of  the  publisher. 


PRINTED  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OB'  AMERICA 


PBBPAOE  TO  THE  NEW  EDITION 


To  say  that  a  text  is  ‘  revised  ’  may  signify  alight  verbal 
changes  or  an  extensive  rewriting.  The  new  edition  of  How 
We  Think,  which  is  presented  herewith,  is  a  revision  of  the 
latter  sort,  It  is,  as  its  subtitle  indicates,  a  ‘  restatement  ’  of 
How  We  Think. 

In  the  first  place,  although  some  material  found  in  the 
original  edition  has  been  excised,  there  has  been  consider¬ 
able  expansion.  The  present  book  contains  nearly  a  quarter 
more  than  did  the  older  account. 

In  the  second  place,  the  revision  has  been  made  with  a 
view  to  increased  definiteness  and  clearness  of  statement, 
Scrupulous  pains  have  been  taken  to  restate  all  ideas  that 
were  found  by  teachers  to  give  undue  trouble  in  understand¬ 
ing.  The  changes  in  this  respect  apply  both  to  matters  of 
phrasing,  where  a  multitude  of  minor  alterations  have  been 
made  in  the  interests  of  greater  surcncss  of  comprehension, 
and  also  to  the  development  of  major  ideas.  The  latter 
changes  are  most  numerous  and  complete  in  Pai-t  II,  the 
theoretical  section  of  the  book.  There  the  whole  logical 
analysis  of  reflection  has  been  rewritten  and,  it  is  believed, 
very  considerably  simplified  in  statement.  At  the  same  time, 
the  basic  ideas,  those  that  gave  the  original  work  its  dis¬ 
tinctive  character,  have  not  only  been  retained  but  have 
also  been  enriched  and  developed  further.  In  the  interests 
of  clearness  more  illustrative  material  has  been  added,  and 
some  rearrangement  of  the  position  of  entire  chapters  has 
been  made. 

In  the  third  place,  changes  will  be  evident  in  the  parts 
devoted  to  teaching.  These  changes  reflect  the  large  changes 
that  have  taken  place  in  schools,  especially  in  the  manage- 


iv  PREFACE  TO  THE  NEW  EDITION 

ment  of  teaching  and  studying,  since  1910j  when  the  book 
first  appeared.  Some  methods  that  were  criticized  because 
of  their  currency  at  that  time  have  now  practically  disap¬ 
peared  from  the  better  schools,  New  topics  have  come  to  the 
fore.  Adjustments  have  accordingly  been  made  in  the  text; 
for  example,  the  present  chapter  on  "  The  Recitation  ”  is 
practically  all  new. 

In  conclusion,  it  is  a  gi’eat  pleasure  to  express  my  thanks 
to  the  many  teachers  whose  experience  in  using  the  older 
book  has  been  freely  put  at  my  disposal  in  preparing  the 
new  and,  I  venture  to  hope,  improved  version. 

John  Dewey 


PKEFAGE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 


Our  schools  are  troubled  with  a  multiplication  of  studies, 
each  in  turn  having  its  own  multiplication  of  materials  and 
principles.  Our  teachers  find  their  tasks  made  heavier  in 
that  they  have  come  to  deal  with  pupils  individually  and 
not  merely  in  mass.  Unless  these  steps  in  advance  are  to 
end  in  distraction,  some  clew  of  unity,  some  principle  that 
makes  for  simplification,  must  be  found.  This  book  repre¬ 
sents  the  conviction  that  the  needed  steadying  and  centraliz¬ 
ing  factor  is  found  in  adopting  as  the  end  of  endeavor  that 
attitude  of  mind,  that  habit  of  thought,  which  we  call  sci¬ 
entific.  This  scientific  attitude  of  mind  might,  conceivably, 
be  quite  irrelevant  to  teaching  children  and  youth.  But  this 
book  also  represents  the  conviction  that  such  is  not  the 
case;  that  the  native  and  unspoiled  attitude  of  childhood, 
marked  by  ardent  curiosity,  fertile  imagination,  and  love  of 
experimental  inquiry,  is  near,  very  near,  to  the  attitude  of 
the  scientific  mind.  If  these  pages  assist  any  to  appreciate 
this  kinship  and  to  consider  seriously  how  its  recognition  in 
educational  practice  would  make  for  individual  happiness 
and  the  reduction  of  social  waste,  the  book  will  amply  have 
served  its  purpose. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  enumerate  the  authors  to  whom 
I  am  indebted.  My  fundamental  indebtedness  is  to  my 
wife,  by  whom  the  ideas  of  this  book  were  inspired,  and 
through  whose  work  in  connection  with  the  Laboratory 
School,  existing  in  Chicago  between  1896  and  1903,  the  ideas 
attained  such  concreteness  as  comes  from  embodiment  and 
testing  in  practice.  It  is  a  pleasure,  also,  to  acknowledge  in¬ 
debtedness  to  the  intelligence  and  sympathy  of  those  who 
cooperated  as  teachers  and  supei'visors  in  the  conduct  of 


CONTENTS 


viii 


PART  n 

LOGICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 
chaptbh  fagb 

V.  The  Process  and  Product  op  Reflective  Ac¬ 
tivity:  Psychological  Process  and  Logi¬ 
cal  Form .  71 

I.  Thinkiug  as  a  Formal  and  as  an  Actual  Occur¬ 
rence.  II.  Education  in  Relation  to  Form.  III.  Disci¬ 
pline  and  Freedom. 

VI.  Examples  of  Inference  and  Testing .  91 

I.  Illustrations  of  Reflective  Activity.  II.  Inference 
to  the  Unknown.  III.  Thinking  Moves  from  a 
Doubtful  to  a  Settled  Situation. 


VII.  Analysis  of  Reflective  Thinking .  102 

I.  Facts  and  Ideas.  II.  The  Essential  Functions  of 
Reflective  Activity, 

VIII.  The  Place  of  Judgment  in  Reflective  Ac¬ 

tivity  .  119 


I.  Three  Factors  in  Judging.  II.  Analysis  and  Syn¬ 
thesis;  The  Two  Functions  of  Judgment. 


IX.  Understanding:  Ideas  and  Meanings  ....  132^ 
I.  Ideas  as  Suggestions  and  Conjectures.  II.  Things 
and  Meanings.  Ill,  The  Process  by  Which  Things 
Acquire  Meaning. 

X.  Understanding:  Conception  and  Defini-  ^ 

TION  .  149 

I.  The  Nature  of  Conceptions.  11.  How  Conceptions 
Arise.  HI.  Definition  and  Organization  of  Meanmgs. 

XI.  Systematic  Method:  Control  of  Data  and 

Evidence  .  166 

I.  Method  as  Deliberate  Testing  of  Facta  and  Ideas, 

II.  The  Importance  of  Method  in  Judging  Data. 


CONTENTS 


ix 

.  CHAPTER  PAOE 

■J  XII.  Systematic  Method:  Control  OF  Ueasoning 

AND  Concepts .  179 


I,  The  Value  of  Scientific  Conceptions.  II,  Signifi¬ 
cant  Applications  to  Education;  Characteristic  In¬ 
adequacies. 

XIII.  Empirical  and  Scientific  Thought .  190 

I.  What  Is  Meant  by  Empirical.  II,  Scientific 
Method, 


PART  III 

THE  TRAINING  OF  THOUGHT 

XIV.  Activity  and  the  Training  op  Thought  . . .  205 
I.  The  Early  Stage  of  Activity.  II.  Play,  Work,  and 
Allied  Forms  of  Activity.  III.  Constructive  Occu¬ 
pations. 

XV.  From  the  Concrete  to  the  Abstract .  220 

I.  What  Is  the  Concrete?  II.  What  Is  the  Abstract  ? 

XVI.  Language  and  the  Training  op  Thought  , .  230 
I.  Language  as  the  Tool  of  Thinking.  II.  The  Abuse 

of  Linguistic  Methods  in  Education.  III.  The  Use 
of  Language  in  its  Educational  Bearings. 

XVII.  Observation  and  Information  in  the 

Training  op  Mind  .  247 

I.  The  Nature  and  Value  of  Observation.  II.  Meth¬ 
ods  and  Materials  of  Observation  in  the  Sehools- 
III.  Communication  of  Information. 

XVIII.  The  Recitation  and  the  Training  op 

Thought  .  260 

I.  False  Ideas  about  the  Recitation.  II.  The  Func¬ 
tions  of  the  Recitation.  III.  The  Conduct  of  the 
Recitation.  IV.  The  Function  of  the  Teacher.  V. 
Appreciation. 


CONTENTS 


X 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

XIX.  Some  General  Conclusion!3 .  280 

I.  The  Unconscious  and  the  Conscious,  11.  Proccas 
and  Product.  III.  The  Far  and  the  Near. 

Index  .  295 


PART  ONE 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  TRAINING  THOUGHT 


OHAPTEE  ONE 


WHAT  IS  THINKING? 


I.  Different  Meanings  of  Thought 
The  Beat  Way  of  Thinking 

No  one  can  tell  another  person  in  any  definite  way  how 
he  should  think,  any  more  than  how  he  ought  to  breathe  or 
to  have  his  blood  circulate.  But  the  various  ways  in  which 
men  do  think  can  be  told  and  can  be  described  in  their  gen¬ 
eral  features.  Some  of  these  ways  are  better  than  others; 
the  reasons  why  they  are  better  can  be  set  forth.  The  per¬ 
son  who  understands  what  the  better  ways  of  thinking  are 
and  why  they  are  better  can,  if  he  will,  change  his  own  per¬ 
sonal  ways  until  they  become  more  effective ;  until,  that  is  to 
say,  they  do  better  the  work  that  thinking  can  do  and  that 
other  mental  operations  cannot  do  so  well.  The  better  way 
of  thinking  that  is  to  be  considered  in  this  book  is  called 
reflective  thinking:  the  kind  of  thinking  that  consists  in 
turning ~a" subject  over  in  the  mind  and  giving  it  serious 
and  consecutive  consideration.  Before  we  take  up  this  main 
theme,  we  shall,  however,  first  take  note  briefly  of  some 
other  mental  processes  to  which  the  name  thought  is  some¬ 
times  given. 

The  ‘  Stream  of  Consciousness  ’ 

All  the  time  we  are  awake  and  sometimes  when  we  are 
asleep,  something  is,  as  we  say,  going  through  our  heads. 
When  we  are  asleep  we  call  that  kind  of  sequence  '  dream¬ 
ing.’  We  also  have  daydreams,  reveries,  castles  built  in  the 


4  HOW  WE  THINK 

air,  and  mental  streams  that  are  even  more  idle  and  chaotic. 
To  this  uncontrolled  coursing  of  ideas  through  our  heads  the 
name  of  '  thinking  ’  is  sometimes  given.  It  is  automatic  and 
unregulated.  Many  a  child  has  attempted  to  see  whether  he 
could  not  '  stop  thinking  ’  —  that  is,  stop  this  procession  of 
mental  states  through  his  mind  —  and  in  vain.  More  of  our 
waking  life  than  most  of  us  would  care  to  admit  is  whiled 
away  in  this  inconsequential  trifling  with  mental  pictures, 
random  recollections,  pleasant  but  unfounded  hopes,  flitting, 
half-developed  impressions.  Hence  it  is  that  he  who  offers  '  a 
penny  for  your  thoughts  ’  does  not  expect  to  drive  any  great 
bargain  if  his  offer  is  taken ;  he  will  only  find  out  what  hap¬ 
pens  to  be  ‘  going  through  the  mind  ’  and  what  ‘  goes  ‘  in  this 
fashion  rarely  leaves  much  that  is  worth  while  behind. 

Reflective  Thought  la  a  Chain 

In  this  sense,  silly  folk  and  dullards  think.  The  story  is 
told  of  a  man  in  slight  repute  for  intelligence,  who,  desiring 
to  be  chosen  selectman  in  his  New  England  town,  addressed 
a  knot  of  neighbors  in  this  wise:  “  I  hear  you  don’t  believe 
I  know  enough  to  hold  offlce.  I  wish  you  to  understand  that 
I  am  thinking  about  something  or  other  most  of  the  time," 
Now,  reflective  thought  is  like  this  random  coursing  of 
things  through  the  mind  in  that  it  consists  of  a  succession 
of  things  thought  of,  but  it  is  unlike  in  that  the  mere  chance 
occurrence  of  any  chance  ‘  something  or  other  '  in  an  irregu¬ 
lar  sequence  does  not  suflnce(Reflection  involves  not  simply 
a  sequence  of  ideas,  but  a  coji-sequence  —  a  consecutive  or¬ 
dering  in  such  a  way  that  each  determines  the  next  as  its 
proper  outcome,  while  each  outcome  in  turn  leans  back  on, 
or  refers  to,  its  predecessors.  The  successive  portions  of  a 
reflective  thought  grow  out  of  one  another  and  support  one 
another;  they  do  not  come  and  go  in  a  medley.  Each  phase 
is  a  step  from  something  to  something  —  technically  apeak- 


WHAT  IS  THINKING?  5 

ing,  it  is  a  term  of  thought.  Each  term  leaves  a  deposit  that 
is  utilized  in  the  next  term.  The  stream  or  flow  becomes  a 
train  or  chain.  There  are  in  any  reflective  thought  definite 
units  that  are  linked  together  so  that  there  is  a  sustained 
movement  to  a  common  end. 

Thinking  Usually  Restricted  to  Things  Not  Directly  Perceived 

The  second  meaning  of  thinking  limits  it  to  things  not 
sensed  or  directly  perceived,  to  things  not  seen,  heard, 
touched,  smelt,  or  tasted.  We  ask  the  man  telling  a  story  if 
he  saw  a  certain  incident  happen,  and  his  reply  may  be, 
"  No,  I  only  thought  of  it.”  A  note  of  invention,  as  distinct 
from  faithful  record  of  observation,  is  present.  Most  im¬ 
portant  in  this  class  are  successions  of  imaginative  incidents 
and  episodes  that  have  a  certain  coherence,  hang  together 
on  a  continuous  thread,  and  thus  lie  between  kaleidoscopic 
flights  of  fancy  and  considerations  deliberately  employed  to 
establish  a  conclusion.  The  imaginative  stories  poured  forth 
by  children  possess  all  degrees  of  internal  congruity;  some 
are  disjointed,  some  are  articulated.  When  connected,  they 
simulate  reflective  thought;  indeed,  they  usually  occur  in 
minds  of  logical  capacity.  These  imaginative  enterprises 
often  precede  thinking  of  the  close-knit  type  and  prepare 
the  way  for  it.  In  this  sensej(_a  thought  or  idea  is  a  mental 
picture  of  something  not  actually  present,  and  thinking  is 
the  succession  of  such  pictures.^ 

Reflective  Thinking  Aims  at  a  Conclusion 

In  contrast,  reflective  thinking  has  a  purpose  beyond  the 
entertainment  afforded  by  the  train  of  agreeable  mental  in¬ 
ventions  and  pictures.  The  train  must  lead  somewhere;  it 
must  tend  to  a  conclusion  that  can  be  substantiated  outside 
the  course  of  the  images.  A  story  of  a  giant  may  satisfy 
merely  because  of  the  story  itself;  a  reflective  conclusion 


6  HOW  WE  THINK 

that  a  giant  lived  at  a  certain  date  and  place  on  the  earth 
would  have  to  have  some  justification  outside  of  the  chain 
of  ideas  in  order  to  be  a  valid  or  sound  conclusion.  This  con¬ 
trasting  element  is  probably  best  conveyed  in  the  ordinary 
saying:  "Think  it  out”  The  phrase  suggests  an  entangle¬ 
ment  to  be  straightened  out,  something  obscure  to  be  cleared 
up  through  the  application  of  thought.  There  i.s  a  goal  to  be 
reached,  and  this  end  sets  a  task  that  controls  the  sequence 
of  ideas. 

Thinking  as  Practically  Synonymous  with  Believing 

A  third  meaning  of  thought  is  practically  synonymous 
with  belief.  “  I  think  it  is  going  to  be  colder  tomorrow,”  or 
“  I  think  Hungary  is  larger  than  Jugo-Slavia  ”  is  equivalent 
to  “  1  believe  so-and-so."  When  we  say,  "  Men  used  to  think 
the  world  was  flat,”  we  obviously  refer  to  a  belief  that  was 
held  by  our  ancestors.  This  meaning  of  thought  is  narrower 
than  those  previously  mentioned.|;jA  belief  refers  to  some¬ 
thing  beyond  itself  by  which  its  value  is  tG.sted ;  it  makes  an 
assertion  about  some  matter  of  fact  or  some  princiiflc  or  law. 
It  means  that  a  specified  state  of  fact'  or  law  is  accepted  or 
rejected,  that  it  is  something  proper  to  be  affirmed  or  at  least 
acquiesced  in^It  is  hardly  necessary  to  lay  stress  upon  the 
importance  of  belief.^It  covers  all  the  matters  of  which  we 
have  no  sure  knowledge  and  yet  which  we  are  stifficiently 
confident  of  to  act  upon  and  also  the  matters  that  we  now  ac¬ 
cept  as  certainly  true,  as  knowledge,  but  which  nevertheless 
may  be  questioned  in  the  future  —  just  as  much  that  passed 
as  knowledge  in  the  past  has  now  passed  into  the  limbo  of 
mere  opinion  or  of  error.'V 

There  is  nothing  in  the  mere  fact  of  thought  as  identical 
with  belief  that  reveals  whether  the  belief  is  well  founded  or 
not.  Two  different  men  say,  “  I  believe  the  world  is  spheri¬ 
cal."  One  man,  if  challenged,  could  produce  little  or  no  evi- 


WHAT  IS  THINKING? 


7 

dence  for  thinking  aa  he  does.  It  is  an  idea  that  he  has  picked 
up  from  others  and  that  he  accepts  because  the  idea  is  gen¬ 
erally  current)  not  because  he  has  examined  into  the  matter 
and  not  because  his  own  mind  has  taken  any  active  part  in 
reaching  and  framing  the  belief. 

Such  '  thoughts  ’  grow  up  unconsciously.  They  are  picked 
up  — we  know  not  how.  From  obscure  sources  and  by  un¬ 
noticed  channels  they  insinuate  themselves  into  the  mind 
and  become  unconsciously  a  part  of  our  mental  furniture. 
Tradition,  instruction,  imitation  —  all  of  which  depend  upon 
authority  in  some  form,  or  appeal  to  our  own  advantage,  or 
fall  in  with  a  strong  passion  —  are  responsible  for  them. 
Such  thoughts  are  prejudices;  that  is,  prejudgments,  not  con^ 
elusions  reached  as  the  result  of  personal  mental  activity, 
such  as  observing,  collecting,  and  examining  evidence.  Even 
when  they  happen  to  be  correct,  their  correctness  is  a  matter 
of  accident  aa  far  as  the  person  who  entertains  them  is 
concerned. 


Reflective  Thinking  Impels  to  Inquiry 

Thus  we  are  brought  again,  by  way  of  contrast,  to  the  par¬ 
ticular  kind  of  thinking  that  we  are  to  study  in  this  volume, 
reflective  thinking.  Thought,  in  the  two  first  senses  men¬ 
tioned,  may  be  harmful  to  the  mind  because  it  distracts  at¬ 
tention  from  the  real  world,  and  because  it  may  be  a  waste 
of  time.  On  the  other  hand,  if  indulged  in  judiciously  these 
thoughts  rb ay  afford  genuine  enjoyment  and  also  be  a  source 
of  needed  recreation.  But  in  either  case  they  can  make  no 
claim  to  truth;  they  cannot  hold  themselves  up  as  some¬ 
thing  that  the  mind  should  accept,  assert,  and  be  willing  to, 
act  upon.  They  may  involve  a  kind  of  emotional  commit-' 
ment,  but  not  intellectual  and  practical  commitment.  Be¬ 
liefs,  on  the  other  hand,  do  involve  precisely  this  commit¬ 
ment  and  consequently  sooner  or  later  they  demand  our 


3  HOW  WE  THINK 

investigation  to  find  out  upon  what  grounds  they  rest.  To 
think  of  a  cloud  as  a  whale  or  a  camel  —  in  the  sense  of  to 
'  fancy  '  —  does  not  commit  one  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
person  having  the  idea  would  ride  the  camel  or  extract  oil 
from  the  whale.  But  when  Columbus  ‘  thought  ’  the  world  was 
round,  in  the  sense  of  ‘  believed  it  to  be  so,’  he  and  his  follow¬ 
ers  were  thereby  committed  to  a  series  of  other  beliefs  and 
actions:  to  beliefs  about  routes  to  India,  about  what  would 
happen  if  ships  traveled  far  westward  on  the  Atlantic,  etc., 
precisely  as  thinking  that  the  world  was  flat  had  committed 
those  who  held  it  to  belief  in  the  impossibility  of  circumnavi¬ 
gation,  and  in  the  limitation  of  the  earth  to  regions  in  the 
small  civilized  part  of  it  Europeans  were  already  acquainted 
with,  etc, 

The  earlier  thought,  belief  in  the  flatness  of  the  earth,  had 
some  foundation  in  evidence ;  it  rested  upon  what  men  could 
see  easily  within  the  limits  of  their  vision.  But  this  evidence 
was  not  further  looked  into;  it  was  not  checked  by  consider¬ 
ing  other  evidence;  there  was  no  search  for  new  evidence. 
Ultimately  the  belief  rested  on  laziness,  inertia,  custom,  ab¬ 
sence  of  courage  and  energy  in  inveistigation.  The  later  belief 
rests  upon  careful  and  extensive  study,  upon  purposeful 
widening  of  the  area  of  observation,  upon  reasoning  out  the 
conclusions  of  alternative  conceptions  to  see  what  would 
follow  in  case  one  or  the  other  were  adopted  for  belief.  As 
distinct  from  the  first  kind  of  thinking  there  was  an  orderly 
chain  of  ideas;  as  distinct  from  the  second,  there  was  a  con¬ 
trolling  purpose  and  end;  as  distinct  from  the  third,  there 
was  personal  examination,  scrutiny,  inquiry, 

Because  Columbus  did  not  accept  unhesitatingly  the  cur¬ 
rent  traditional  theory,  because  he  doubted  and  inquired,  he 
arrived  at  his  thought.  Skeptical  of  what,  from  long  habit, 
seemed  most  certain,  and  credulous  of  what  seemed  impos¬ 
sible,  he  went  on  thinking  until  he  could  produce  evidence 


WHAT  IS  THINKING?  9 

for  both  his  confidence  and  his  disbelief.  Even  if  hia  conclu¬ 
sion  had  finally  turned  out  wrong,  it  would  have  been  a  dif¬ 
ferent  sort  of  belief  from  those  it  antagonized,  because  it  was 
reached  by  a  different  method.  Active,  versistenL..and.-  care- 
ful  consideration  of  any  belief  or  suyyosed  form  of  knowl- 
ecTge  in  the  light  of  the  grounds  that  support  it  and  the  fur¬ 
ther  conclusions  to  which  it  tends  constitutes  reflective 
thought.  Any  one  of  the  first  three  kinds  of  thought  may 
elicit  this  type;  but  once  begun,  it  includes  a  conscious  and 
voluntary  effort  to  establish  belief  upon  a  firm  basis  of  evi¬ 
dence  and  rationality. 


II.  The  Cen'cral  Factor  in  Thinking 
The  Suggestion  of  Something  Not  Observed 

There  are,  however,  no  sharp  lines  of  demarcation  be¬ 
tween  the  various  operations  just  outlined.  The  problem  of 
attaining  correct  habits  of  reflection  would  be  much  easier 
than  it  is,  did  not  the  different  modes  of  thinking  blend  in¬ 
sensibly  into  one  another.  So  far,  we  have  considered  rather 
extreme  instances  of  each  kind  in  order  to  get  the  field 
clearly  before  us.  Let  us  now  reverse  this  operation;  let  us 
consider  a  rudimentary  case  of  thinking,  lying  between  care¬ 
ful  examination  of  evidence  and  a  mere  irresponsible  stream 
of  fancies.  A  man  is  walking  on  a  warm  day.  The  sky  was 
clear  the  last  time  he  observed  it;  but  presently  he  notes, 
while  occupied  primarily  with  other  things,  that  the  air  is 
cooler.  It  occurs  to  him  that  it  is  probably  going  to  rain; 
looking  up,  he  sees  a  dark  cloud  between  him  and  the  sun, 
and  he  then  quickens  his  steps.  What,  if  anything,  in  such  a 
situation  can  be  called  thought?  Neither  the  act  of  walking 
nor  the  noting  of  the  cold  is  a  thought.  Walking  is  one  direc¬ 
tion  of  activity ;  looking  and  noting  are  other  modes  of  ao- 


10  HOW  WK  THINK 

tivity.  The  likelihood  that  it  will  rain  is,  however,  something 
suggested.  The  pedestrian  /eels  the  cold ;  first  he  thinks  of 
clouds,  then  he  looks  and  perceives  them,  and  then  he  thinks 
of  something  he  does  not  see:  a  storm.  This  suggested  pos¬ 
sibility  is  the  idea,  the  thought.  If  it  is  believed  in  as  a  genu¬ 
ine  possibility  which  may  occur,  it  is  the  kind  of  thought 
which  falls  within  the  scope  of  knowledge  and  which  re¬ 
quires  reflective  consideration. 

Up  to  a  certain  point  there  is  the  same  sort  of  situation  as 
when  one  who  looks  at  a  cloud  is  reminded  of  a  human  fig¬ 
ure  and  face.iThinking  in  both  of  the-se  cases  (the  ca.se, s  of 
belief  and  of  fancy)  involves  noting  or  perceiving  a  fact, 
followed  by  something  else  that  is  not  observed  but  that 
is  brought  to  mind,  suggested  by  the  thing  seen.  One  thing 
reminds  us,  as  we  say,  of  the  other.  Side  by  .side,  however, 
with  this  factor  of  agreement  in  the  two  cases  of  suggestion 
is  a  factor  of  marked  disagreement.  We  do  not  believe  in  the 
face  suggested  by  the  cloud;  we  do  not  consider  at  all  the 
probability  of  its  being  a  fact.  There  is  no  reflective  thought. 
The  danger  of  rain,  on  the  contrary,  presents  itself  to  us  as 
a  genuine  possibility  —  a  fact  of  the  same  nature  ns  the 
observed  coolness.  Put  differently,  we  do  not  regard  the 
cloud  as  meaning  or  indicating  a  face,  but  merely  as  sug¬ 
gesting  it,  while  we  do  consider  that  the  coolness  may  7nean 
rain.  In  the  first  case,  on  seeing  an  object,  we  ju.st  happen, 
as  we  say,  to  think  of  something  else;  in  the  second,  wc  con¬ 
sider  the  possibility  and  nature  of  the  connection  between 
the  object  seen  and  Ihe  object  suggested.  The  seen  thing  is 
regarded  as  in  someway  the  ground  or  basis  of  belief  in  the 
suggested  thing ;  it  possesses  the  quality  of  evidence.  , 

The  Function  of  Signifying 

This  function  whereby  one  thing  signifies  or  indicates  an¬ 
other,  thus  leading  us  to  consider  how  far  the  one  may 


WHAT  IS  THINKING?  ^ 

be  regarded  as  warrant  for  belief  in  the  other,  is,  then,  the 
central  factor  in  all  reflective  or  distinctively  intellectual 
thinking,  By  calling  up  various  situations  to  which  such 
terms  as  signifies  and  indicates  apply,  the  student  will  real¬ 
ize  for  himself  the  actual  facts  denoted,  Synonyms  for  these 
terms  are:  points  to,  tells  of,  betokens,  prognosticates,  repre¬ 
sents,  stands  for,  implies.^  We  also  say  one  thing  portends 
another,  is  ominous  of  another,  or  a  symptom  of  it,  or  a  key 
to  it,  or  (if  the  connection  is  quite  obscure)  that  it  gives  a 
hint,  clue,  or  intimation.  Reflection  is  not  identical  with  the 
mere  fact  that  one  thing  indicates,  means,  another  thing.  It 
commences  when  we  begin  to  inquire  into  the  reliability,  the 
worth,  of  any  particular  indication;  when  we  try  to  test  its 
value  and  see  what  guarantee  there  is  that  the  existing  data 
really  point  to  the  idea  that  is  suggested  in  such  a  way  as  to 
justify  acceptance  of  the  latter. 

Reflection  Implies  Belief  on  Evidence 

Reflection  thus  implies  that  something  is  believed  in  (or 
disbelieved  in) ,  not  on  its  own  direct  account,  but  through 
something  else  which  stands  as  witness,  evidence,  proof 
voucher,  warrant;  that  is,  as  ground  of  belief.  At  one  time' 
rain  is  actually  felt  or  directly  experienced ;  at  another  time 
we  infer  that  it  has  rained  from  the  appearance  of  the  grass 
and  trees,  or  that  it  is  going  to  rain  because  of  the  condition 
of  the  air  or  the  state  of  the  barometer.  At  one  time,  we  see  a 
man  (or  suppose  we  do)  without  any  intermediary  fact;  at 
another  time,  we  are  not  quite  sure  what  we  see,  and  hunt 
for  accompanying  facts  that  will  serve  as  signs,  indications, 
tokens  of  what  we  are  to  believe. 

1  Implies  ia  more  often  uaed  when  a  principle  or  general  truth 
brings  about  belief  in  some  other  truth;  the  other  phrasea  are  more 
frequently  used  to  denote  the  cUiSes  in  which  a  fact  or  event  leads  ub 
to  believe  in  some  other  fact  or  in  a  law. 


12  HOW  WE  THINK 

Thinking,  for  the  purposes  of  this  inquiry,  is  accordingly 
defined  as  that  operation  in  which  present  facts  suggest 
other  facts  (or  truths)  in  such  a  way  as  to  induce  belief  in 
what  is  suggested  on  the  ground  of  real  relation  in  the  things 
themselves,  a  relation  between  what  suggests  and  what  is 
suggested.  A  cloud  suggests  a  weasel  or  a  whale;  it  does  not 
mean  the  latter,  because  there  is  no  tie,  or  bond,  in  the 
things  themselves  between  what  i-s  seen  and  what  is  sug¬ 
gested.  Ashes  not  merely  suggest  a  previou.s  fire,  but  they 
signify  there  has  been  a  fire,  because  ashes  arc  produced  by 
combustion  and,  if  they  are  genuine  aslies,  only  by  combus¬ 
tion.  It  is  an  objective  connection,  the  link  in  actual  thinp, 
that  makes  one  thing  the  ground,  warrant,  evidence,  for  be¬ 
lieving  in  something  else. 


III.  Phases  op  Reflective  Thinking 

We  may  carry  our  account  further  by  noting  that  reflec¬ 
tive  thinking,  in  distinction  from  other  operations  to  whicli 
we  apply  the  name  of  thought,  involve.s  (1)  a  state  of  doubt, 
hesitation,  perplexity,  mental  difficulty,  in  which  thinking 
originates,  and  (2)  an  act  of  searching,  hunting,  inquiring, 
to  find  material  that  will  resolve  the  doubt,  settle  and  dis¬ 
pose  of  the  perplexity. 

The  Importance  of  Uncertainty  and  of  Inquiry 

In  our  illustration,  the  shock  of  coolness  generated  con¬ 
fusion  and  suspended  belief,  at  least  momentarily.  Because 
it  was  unexpected,  it  was  a  shock  or  an  interruption  needing 
to  be  accounted  for,  identified,  or  placed.  To  say  that  the 
abrupt  occurrence  of  the  change  of  temperature  constitutes 
a  problem  may  sound  forced  and  artificial;  but  if  we  are 
willing  to  extend  the  meaning  of  the  word  problem  to  what- 


WHAT  IS  THINKING?  13 

ever  —  no  matter  how  slight  and  commonplace  in  character 
— perplexes  and  challenges  the  mind  so  that  it  makes  belief 
at  all  uncertain,  there  is  a  genuine  problem,  or  question,  in¬ 
volved  in  an  experience  of  sudden  change. 

The  turning  of  the  head,  the  lifting  of  the  eyes,  the  scan¬ 
ning  of  the  heavens,  are  activities  adapted  to  bring  to  recog¬ 
nition  facta  that  will  answer  the  question  presented  by  the 
sudden  coolness.  The  facts  as  they  first  presented  them¬ 
selves  were  perplexing ;  they  suggested,  however,  clouds.  The 
act  of  looking  was  an  act  to  discover  whether  this  suggested 
explanation  held  good.  It  may  again  seem  forced  to  speak  of 
this  looking,  almost  automatic,  as  an  act  of  research,  or  in¬ 
quiry.  But  once  more,  if  we  are  willing  to  generalize  our  con¬ 
ceptions  of  our  mental  operations  to  include  the  trivial  and 
ordinary  as  well  as  the  technical  and  recondite,  there  is  no 
good  reason  for  refusing  to  give  this  title  to  the  act  of  look¬ 
ing.  For  the  result  of  the  act  is  to  bring  facts  before  the 
mind  that  enable  a  person  to  reach  a  conclusion  on  the  basis 
of  evidence.  In  so  far,  then,  as  the  act  of  looking  was  delib¬ 
erate,  was  performed  with  the  intention  of  getting  an  ex¬ 
ternal  basis  on  which  to  rest  a  belief,  it  exemplifies  in  an 
elementary  way  the  operation  of  hunting,  searching,  inquir¬ 
ing,  involved  in  any  reflective  operation. 

Another  instance,  commonplace  also,  yet  not  quite  so 
trivial,  may  enforce  this  lesson.  A  man  traveling  in  an  un¬ 
familiar  region  comes  to  a  branching  of  the  road.  Having 
no  sure  knowledge  to  fall  back  upon,  he  is  brought  to  a 
standstill  of  hesitation  and  suspense.  Which  road  is  right? 
And  how  shall  his  perplexity  be  resolved?  There  are  but  two 
alternatives:  he  must  either  blindly  and  arbitrarily  take  his 
course,  trusting  to  luck  for  the  outcome,  or  he  must  discover 
grounds  for  the  conclusion  that  a  given  road  is  right.  Any 
attempt  to  decide  the  matter  by  thinking  will  involve  in¬ 
quiring  into  other  facta,  whether  brought  to  mind  by  mem- 


14  HOW  WE  THINK 

ory,  or  by  further  observation,  or  by  both.  The  perplexed 
wayfarer  must  carefully  scrutinize  what  is  before  him  and 
he  must  cudgel  his  memory.  He  looks  for  evidence  that  will 
support  belief  in  favor  of  either  of  the  roads  —  for  evidence 
that  will  weight  down  one  suggestion.  He  may  climb  a  tree; 
he  may  go  first  in  this  direction,  then  in  tliat,  looking,  in 
either  case,  for  signs,  clues,  indications.  He  wants  something 
in  the  nature  of  a  signboard  or  a  map,  and  his  reflection  is 
aimed  at  the  discovery  of  facts  that  will  serve  this  ‘puryose. 

The  foregoing  illustration  may  be  generalized.  Tliinking 
begins  in  what  may  fairly  enough  be  called  a  forked-road 
situation,  a  situation  that  is  ambiguous,  that  presents  a 
I  dilemma,  that  proposes  alternatives.  As  long  as  our  activity 
glides  smoothly  along  from  one  thing  to  another,  or  ns  long 
as  we  permit  our  imagination  to  entertain  fancies  at  pleas¬ 
ure,  there  is  no  call  for  reflection.  Difficulty  or  obstruction 
in  the  way  of  reaching  a  belief  brings  us,  however,  to  a 
pause.  In  the  suspense  of  uncertainty,  wo  metaphorically 
climb  a  tree;  we  try  to  find  some  standpoint  from  which  we 
may  survey  additional  facts  and,  getting  a  more  command¬ 
ing  view  of  the  situation,  decide  how  the  facts  stand  related 
to  one  another. 

The  Regulation  of  Thinking  by  Its  Purpose 

Demand  for  the  solution  of  a  perplexity  is  the  steadying 
and  guiding  factor  in  the  entire  process  of  reflection.  Where 
there  is  no  question  of  a  problem  to  be  solved  or  a  difficulty 
to  be  surmounted,  the  course  of  suggestions  flows  on  at 
random;  we  have  the  first  type  of  thought  described.  If  the 
stream  of  suggestions  is  controlled  simply  by  their  emotional 
congruity,  their  fitting  agreeably  into  a  single  picture  or 
story,  we  have  the  second,  type.  But  a  question  to  be  an¬ 
swered,  an  ambiguity  to  be  resolved,  sets  up  an  end  and 
holds  the  current  of  ideas  to  a  definite  channel.  Every 


WHAT  IS  THINKING?  15 

suggested  conclusion  is  tested  by  its  reference  to  this  regu¬ 
lating  end,  by  its  pertinence  to  the  problem  in  hand.  This 
need  of  straightening  out  a  perplexity  also  controls  the 
kind  of  inquiry  undertaken,  A  traveler  whose  end  is  the 
most  beautiful  path  will  look  for  other  signs  and  will  test 
suggestions  on  another  basis  than  if  he  wishes  to  discover  the 
iiway  to  a  given  city.  The  nature  of  the  problem  fixes  the  end 
iof  thought,  and  the  end  controls  the  process  of  thinking. 


IV.  Stjmmaiiy 

We  may  recapitulate  by  saying  that  the  origin  of  think¬ 
ing  is  some  perplexity,  confusion,  or  doubt.  Thinking  is  not 
a  case  of  spontaneous  combustion;  it  does  not  occur  just 
on  ‘  general  principles.'  There  is  something  that  occasions 
and  evokes  it.  General  appeals  to  a  child  (or  to  a  grown-up) 
to  think,  irrespective  of  the  existence  in  his  own  experi¬ 
ence  of  some  difficulty  that  troubles  him  and  disturbs  his 
equilibrium,  are  as  futile  as  advice  to  lift  himself  by  his 
boot-straps. 

Given  a  difficulty,  the  next  step  is  suggestion  of  some  way 
out  —  the  formation  of  some  tentative  plan  or  project,  the 
entertaining  of  some  theory  that  will  account  for  the  pe¬ 
culiarities  in  question,  the  consideration  of  some  solution 
for  the  problem.  The  data  at  hand  cannot  supply  the  solu¬ 
tion;  they  can  only  suggest  it.  What,  then,  are  the  sources 
of  the  suggestion?  Clearly,  past  experience  and  a  fund  of 
relevant  knowledge  at  one’s  command.  If  the  person  has  had 
some  acquaintance  with  similar  situations,  if  he  has  dealt 
with  material  of  the  same  sort  before,  suggestions  more  or 
less  apt  and  helpful  will  arise.  But  unless  there  has  been 
some  analogous  experience,  confusion  remains  mere  con¬ 
fusion.  Even  when  a  child  (or  a  grown-up)  has  a  problem. 


HOW  WE  THINK 


16 

it  is  wholly  futile  to  urge  him  to  think  when  he  has  no  prior 
experiences  that  involve  some  of  the  same  conditions. 
There  may,  however,  be  a  state  of  perplexity  and  also 
previous  experience  out  of  which  suggestions  emerge,  and 
yet  thinking  need  not  be  reflective.  For  the  per.«on  may 
not  be  sufficiently  critical  about  the  ideas  that  occur  to  him. 
He  may  jump  at  a  conclusion  without  weighing  tlic  grounds 
on  which  it  rests;  he  may  forego  or  unduly  shorten  the  act 
of  hunting,  inquiring;  he  may  take  the  fir.st  ‘  ari.swcr,’  or 
solution,  that  cornea  to  him  becauae  of  mental  .sloth,  torpor, 
impatience  to  get  aomething  settled.  One  can  think  reflec¬ 
tively  only  when  one  ia  willing  to  endure  suspen.se  and  to 
undergo  the  trouble  of  searching.  To  many  persons  both 
suspense  of  judgment  and  intellectual  search  are  disagree¬ 
able;  they  want  to  get  them  ended  as  soon  as  pD,ssible. 
They  cultivate  an  over-positive  and  dogmatic  liabitof  mind, 
or  feel  perhaps  that  a  condition  of  doubt  will  be  regarded  as 
evidence  of  mental  inferiority.  It  is  at  the  point  where 
examination  and  test  enter  into  investigation  that  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  reflective  thought  and  bad  thinking  comes  in. 
To  be  genuinely  thoughtful,  we  must  be  willing  to  sustain 
and  protract  that  state  of  doubt  which  is  the  stimulus  to 
thorough  inquiry,  ao  aa  not  to  accept  an  idea  or  make 
positive  assertion  of  a  belief  until  justifying  reasons  have 
been  found. 


CHAPTER  TWO 


WHY  REFLECTIVE  THINKING 
MUST  BE  AN  EDUCATIONAL  AIM 


I.  The  Values  of  Thinking 
It  Makes  Possible  Action  with  a  Conscious  Aim 

We  all  acknowledge,  in  words  at  least,  that  ability  to 
think  is  highly  important;  it  is  regarded  as  the  distinguish¬ 
ing  power  that  marks  man  off  from  the  lower  animals. 
But  since  our  ordinary  notions  of  how  and  why  thinking 
is  important  are  vague, ^it  is  worth  while  to  state  explicitly 
the  values  possessed  by  reflective  thought.  In  the  first  place, 
it  emancipates  us  from  merely  impulsive  and  merely  routine 
activity.  Put  in  positive  terms,  thinking  enables  us  to  di¬ 
rect  our  activities  with  foresight  and  to  plan  according  to 
ends-in-view,  or  purposes  of  which  we  are  aware'^It  enables 
us  to  act  in  deliberate  and  intentional  fashion  to  attain 
future  objects  or  to  come  into  command  of  what  is  now 
distant  and  lacking.  By  putting  the  consequences  of  dif¬ 
ferent  ways  and  lines  of  action  before  the  mind,  it  enables 
us  to  know  what  we  are  about  when  we  act.  It  convertsi 
action  that  is  merely  appetitive,  blind,  and  impulsive  into ' 
intelligent  action.  A  brute  animal,  as  far  as  we  know,  is 
pushed  on  from  behind ;  it  is  moved  in  accordance  with  its 
present  physiological  state  by  some  present  external  stim¬ 
ulus.  The  being  who  can  think  is  moved  by  remote  con¬ 
siderations,  by  results  that  can  be  attained  perhaps  only 
after  a  lapse  of  years  —  as  when  a  young  person  sets  out 


18  HOW  WE  THINK 

to  gain  a  professional  education  to  fit  himself  for  a  career 

in  years  to  come. 

For  example,  an  animal  without  thought  will  go  into  its 
hole  when  rain  threatens,  because  of  some  immediate  stim¬ 
ulus  to  its  organism.  But  a  thinking  being  will  perceive  that 
certain  given  facts  are  probable  signs  of  a  future  rain  and 
will  take  steps  in  the  light  of  this  antic  iiiatetl  future.  To 
plant  seeds,  to  cultivate  the  soil,  to  harvest  grain,  are  in¬ 
tentional  acts,  possible  only  to  a  being  wlio  has  Iciirncd  to 
subordinate  the  immediately  felt  elements  of  an  exi)C!rience 
to  those  values  which  these  elements  hint  at  and  prophesy. 
Philosophers  have  made  much  of  the  phra.scs  '  book  of  na¬ 
ture,’  ‘  language  of  nature.'  Well,  it  is  in  virtue  of  thought 
that  given  things  are  significant  of  absent  things  and  that 
nature  speaks  a  language  which  may  bo  interpreted,  To  a 
being  who  thinks,  things  are  records  of  their  past,  ns  fo.ssils 
tell  of  the  prior  history  of  the  earth,  and  arc  prophetic  of 
their  future,  as  from  the  present  position.?  of  heavenly 
bodies  remote  eclipses  are  foretold.  Shakespeare’s  "  tongues 
in  trees,  books  in  the  running  brooks,”  exprc,ssc.s  literally 
enough  the  power  superadded  to  existences  when  tliey  arc 
used  by  a  thinking  being.  Only  when  things  about  us  have 
meaning  for  us,  only  when  they  signify  consctiucnccs  that 
can  be  reached  by  using  them  in  certain  ways,  is  any  such 
thing  as  intentional,  deliberate  control  of  them  po-ssible. 

It  Makes  Possible  Systematic  Preparations  and  Inventions 

By  thought  man  also  develops  and  arranges  artificial 
signs  to  remind  him  in  advance  of  consequences  and  of 
ways  of  securing  and  avoiding  them.  As  the  trait  just 
mentioned  makes  the  difference  between  savage  man  and 
brute;  so  this  trait  makes  the  difference  between  civilized 
man  and  savage.  A  savage  who  has  been  shipwrecked  on  a 
river  may  note  certain  things  that  serve  him  as  signs  of 


REFLECTIVE  THINKING  AN  AIM  19 

danger  in  the  future.  But  civilized  man  deliberately  makes 
such  signs;  he  sets  up  in  advance  of  any  particular  ship¬ 
wreck  warning  buoys,  and  builds  lighthouses  where  he  sees 
signs  that  such  an  event  may  occur.  A  savage  reads  weather 
signs  with  great  expertness;  civilized  man  institutes  a 
weather  service  by  which  signs  are  artificially  secured  and 
information  is  distributed  in  advance  of  the  appearance 
of  any  signs  that  could  be  detected  without  special  methods. 
A  savage  finds  his  way  skillfully  through  a  wilderness  by 
reading  certain  obscure  indications;  civilized  man  builds  a 
highway  that  shows  the  road  to  all.  The  savage  learns  to 
detect  the  signs  of  fire  and  thereby  to  invent  methods  of 
producing  flame;  civilized  man  discovers  illuminating  gas 
and  oils,  and  invents  lamps,  electric  lights,  stoves,  furnaces, 
central  heating  plants,  etc.  The  very  essence  of  civilized 
culture  is  that  we  deliberately  erect  monuments  and  me¬ 
morials,  lest  we  forget;  and  deliberately  institute,  in  ad¬ 
vance  of  the  happening  of  various  contingencies  and 
emergencies  of  life,  devices  for  detecting  their  approach 
and  registering  their  nature,  for  warding  off  what  is  un¬ 
favorable,  or  at  least  for  protecting  ourselves  from  its  full 
impact  and  for  making  more  secure  and  extensive  what  is 
favorable,  All  forma  of  artificial  apparatus  are  intentional 
modifications  of  natural  things  so  designed  that  they  may 
serve  better  than  in  their  natural  estate  to  indicate  the 
hidden,  the  absent,  and  the  remote. 

It  Enriches  Things  with  Meanings 

Finally,  thought  confers  upon  physical  events  and  ob¬ 
jects  a  very  different  status  and  value  from  those  which  they 
possess  to  a  being  that  does  not  reflect.  These  words  are 
mere  scratches,  curious  variations  of  light  and  shade,  to 
one  to  whom  they  are  not  linguistic  signs.  To  him  for  whom 
they  are  signs  of  other  things,  the  collection  of  marks 


20  HOW  WE  THINK 

atande  for  some  idea  or  object.  We  are  so  used  to  the  fact 
that  things  have  meaning  for  us,  tliat  they  are  not  mere 
excitations  of  sense  organs,  that  we  fail  to  recognize  that 
they  are  charged  with  the  significance  they  have  only  be¬ 
cause  in  the  past  absent  things  have  been  suggested  to  us 
by  what  is  present  and  these  suggestions  have  been  con¬ 
firmed  in  subsequent  experience.  I£  we  sUiniblc  against 
something  in  the  dark,  we  may  react  to  it  and  get  out  of 
the  way  to  save  ourselves  a  bruise  or  a  tumble  without 
recognizing  what  particular  object  it  is.  We  react  almost 
automatically  to  many  stimuli;  they  have  no  meaning  for 
us  or  are  not  definite  individual  objects.  For  an  object  is 
more  than  a  mere  thing;  it  is  a  thing  having  a  definite 
significance. 

The  distinction  we  are  making  can  be  most  readily  un¬ 
derstood  if  the  reader  will  call  to  mind  things  and  events 
that  are  strange  to  him  and  compare  them  with  the  same 
things  and  events  as  they  appear  to  pensons  liaving  expert 
knowledge  of  them ;  or  if  he  will  compare  a  thing  or  event 
as  it  is  before,  with  what  it  i.s  after,  he  has  olitaincd  iatedlec- 
tual  mastery  over  it.  To  a  layman  a  particular  body  of  water 
may  signify  only  something  to  wash  witli  or  to  drink;  to 
another  person  it  may  stand  for  a  union  of  two  chemical 
elements,  themselves  not  liquids  but  gases;  or  it  may  signify 
something  that  should  not  be  drunk  because  of  danger  of 
typhoid  fever .|To  a  baby  things  are  at  first  only  patterns  of 
color  and  light,'  sources  of  sound;  they  acquire  meaning  only 
as  they  become  signs  of  possible,  but  not  yet  present  and 
actual,  experiences.JTo  the  learned  scientific  man,  the  range 
of  meanings  possessed  by  ordinary  things  is  much  widened. 
A  stone  is  not  merely  a  stone;  it  is  a  stone  of  a  given  raineral- 
ogical  type,  from  a  particular  geological  stratum,  etc.  It 
tells  him  something  about  what  happened  millions  of  years 
ago,  and  helps  paint  the  picture  of  the  earth’s  history. 


REFLECTIVE  THINKING  AN  AIM  21 


Control  and  Enriched  Value 

The  first  two  values  mentioned  are  of  a  practical  sort; 
they  give  increased  power  of  control.  The  value  just  men¬ 
tioned  is  an  enrichment  of  meaning  apart  from  added  control 
—  a  certain  event  in  the  heavens  cannot  be  warded  off 
just  because  we  know  it  is  an  eclipse  and  how  it  is  produced, 
but  it  does  have  a  significance  for  us  that  it  did  not  have 
before.  We  may  not  need  to  do  any  thinking  now  when  some 
event  occurs,  but  if  we  have  thought  about  it  before,  the 
outcome  of  that  thinking  is  funded  as  a  directly  added  and 
deepened  meaning  of  the  event.  The  great  reward  of  exer¬ 
cising  the  power  of  thinking  is  that  there  are  no  limits  to  the 
possibility  of  carrying  over  into  the  objects  and  events  of 
life,  meanings  originally  acquired  by  thoughtful  examina¬ 
tion,  and  hence  no  limit  to  the  continual  growth  of  meaning 
in  human  life,  A  child  to-day  may  see  meanings  in  things 
that  were  hidden  from  Ptolemy  and  Copernicus  because  of 
the  results  of  reflective  investigations  that  have  occurred  in 
the  meantime. 

Various  values  of  the  power  of  thought  are  summed  up 
in  the  following  quotation  from  John  Stuart  Mill. 

To  draw  inferences  has  been  said  to  be  the  great  business 
of  life.  Every  one  has  daily,  hourly,  and  momentary  need  of 
ascertaining  facts  which  he  has  not  directly  observed:  not 
from  any  general  purpose  of  adding  to  his  stock  of  knowledge, 
but  because  the  facts  themselves  are  of  importance  to  his 
interests  or  to  his  occupations.  The  business  of  the  magistrate, 
of  the  military  commander,  of  the  navigator,  of  the  physician, 
of  the  agriculturist,  is  merely  to  judge  of  evidence  and  to  act 
accordingly.  ...  As  they  do  this  weU  or  ill,  so  they  discharge 
well  or  iU  the  duties  of  their  several  callings.  It  is  the  only 
occupation  in  which  the  mind  never  ceases  to  be  engaged.^ 

1  Mill,  System  of  Logicj  Introduction,  S  5. 


22 


HOW  WK  THINK 


Two  Reasons  for  TraininE  Thought 

These  three  values,  in  their  cumulative  effect,  make  the 
difference  between  a  truly  human  and  rational  life  and  the 
existence  lived  by  those  animals  that  are  irurrierscd  in  sen¬ 
sation  and  appetite.  Beyond  a  somewhat  narrow  limit,  en¬ 
forced  by  the  necessitie.s  of  life,  the  value.s  that  have  been 
described  do  not,  however,  automatically  realize  tliem- 
selves.  For  anything  approaching  their  adeciiiatc  realization, 
thought  needs  careful  and  attentive  educational  direction. 
Nor  is  that  the  whole  story.  Thinking  may  develop  in  posi¬ 
tively  wrong  ways  and  lead  to  false  and  harmful  beliefs. 
The  need  of  systematic  training  would  be  less  than  it  is 
if  the  only  danger  to  be  feared  were  lack  of  any  develop¬ 
ment;  the  evil  of  the  wi'ong  kind  of  development  is  even 
greater. 

An  earlier  writer  than  Mill,  John  Locke  (1632-1704), 
brings  out  the  importance  of  thought  for  life  and  the  need 
of  training  so  that  its  beat  and  not  its  worst  possibilities  will 
be  realized,  in  the  following  words: 

No  man  ever  sets  himself  about  anything  but  upon  some 
view  or  other,  which  serves  him  for  a  reason  for  wliat  ho  does; 
and  whatsoever  faculties  he  employs,  the  unilcr.staiuliiig  with 
such  light  as  it  has,  well  or  ill  informed,  con.stantly  leads;  and 
by  that  light,  true  or  false,  all  his  operative  powers  are  directed. 

.  .  .  Temples  have  their  sacred  images,  and  we  .sec  what  in¬ 
fluence  they  have  always  had  over  a  great  jfart  of  mankind. 
But  in  truth  the  ideas  and  images  in  men-^  hnind.s  are  the  in¬ 
visible  powers  that  constantly  govern  theih^  and  to  these  they 
ad,  universally,  pay  a  ready  submission.  It  is  therefore  of  the 
highest  concemment  that  great  care  should  be  taken  of  the 
understanding,  to  conduct  it  aright  in  the  search  of  knowledge 
S,n^;'in  judgments  it  makes.* 

'»  Eiooke,  The  Conduct  of  the  Understanding,  first  paragraph. 


REFLECTIVE  THINKING  AN  AIM  23 
While  the  power  of  thought,  then,  frees  us  from  servile 
subjection  to  instinct,  appetite,  and  routine,  it  also  brings 
with  it  the  occasion  and  possibility  of  error  and  mistake.  In 
elevating  us  above  the  brute,  it  opens  the  possibility  of  fail¬ 
ures  to  which  the  animal,  limited  to  instinct,  cannot  sink. 


II.  Tendencies  Needing  Constant  Regulation 
Physical  and  Social  Sanctions  of  Correct  Thinking 

Up  to  a  certain  point,  the  necessities  of  life  enforce  a 
fundamental  and  persistent  discipline  of  thought  for  which 
the  most  cunningly  devised  artifices  would  be  ineffective 
substitutes.  The  burnt  child  dreads  the  fire;  a  painful  con¬ 
sequence  emphasizes  the  need  of  correct  inference  much 
more  than  would  learned  discourses  on  the  properties  of 
heat.  Social  conditions  also  put  a  premium  on  correct  in¬ 
ference  in  matters  where  action  based  on  valid  thought  is 
socially  important.  These  sanctions  of  proper  thinking  may 
affect  life  itself,  or  at  least  a  life  reasonably  free  from  per¬ 
petual  discomfort.  The  signs  of  enemies,  of  shelter,  of  food, 
of  the  main  social  conditions,  have  to  be  correctly  appre¬ 
hended. 

But  this  disciplinary  training,  efficacious  as  it  is  within 
certain  limits,  does  not  carry  us  far.  Logical  attainment  in 
one  direction  is  no  bar  to  extravagant  conclusions  in  an¬ 
other.  A  savage  who  is  expert  in  judging  the  movements  and 
location  of  the  animals  that  he  hunts  will  accept  and 
gravely  narrate  the  most  preposterous  yarns  concerning  the 
origin  of  their  habits  and  peculiarities  of  structure.  When 
there  is  no  direct  appreciable  reaction  of  the  inference 
upon  the  security  and  prosperity  of  life,  there  are  no  natural 
checks  to  the  acceptance  of  wrong  beliefs.  Conclusions  may 
be  accepted  merely  because  the  suggestions  are  vivid  and 


24  HOW  WE  THINK 

interesting,  while  a  large  accumulation  of  dependable  data 
may  fail  to  suggest  a  proper  conclusion  because  of  opposi¬ 
tion  from  existing  ouatoraa.  Then  there  is  a  '  primitive  cre¬ 
dulity,'  a  natural  tendency  to  believe  anything  that  is 
suggested  unless  there  is  overpowering  evidence  to  the  con¬ 
trary.  It  sometimes  aceme,  upon  surveying  the  history  of 
thought,  that  men  exhausted  pretty  much  all  wrong  forms 
of  belief  before  they  hit  upon  the  right  conceptions.  The 
history  of  scientific  beliefs  also  shows  that  when  a  wrong 
theory  once  gets  general  acceptance,  men  will  expend  in¬ 
genuity  of  thought  in  buttressing  it  with  additional  errors 
rather  than  surrender  it  and  start  in  a  new  direction:  wit¬ 
ness  for  example  the  elaborate  pains  taken  to  preserve  the 
Ptolemaic  theory  of  the  solar  system.  Even  to-day  correct 
beliefs  about  the  constitution  of  nature  are  held  by  the  great 
multitude  merely  because  they  are  current  and  popular 
rather  than  because  the  multitude  understands  the  reasons 
upon  which,  they  rest. 

Superstition  Is  as  Natural  as  Science 

As  to  the  mere  function  of  suggestion,  there  is  no  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  power  of  a  column  of  mercury  to  portend 
rain  and  that  of  the  entrails  of  an  animal  or  the  flight  of 
birds  to  foretell  the  fortunes  of  war,  For  all  anybody  can 
tell  in  advance,  the  spilling  of  salt  is  as  likely  to  import 
bad  luck  as  the  bite  of  a  mosquito  to  import  malaria.  Only 
systematic  regulation  of  the  conditions  under  which  ob¬ 
servations  are  made  and  severe  discipline  of  the  habits  of 
entertaining  suggestions  can  secure  a  decision  that  one 
type  of  belief  is  vicious  and  the  other  sound.  The  substi¬ 
tution  of  scientific  for  superstitious  habits  of  inference  has 
not  been  brought  about  by  any  improvement  in  the  acute¬ 
ness  of  the  senses  or  in  the  natural  workings  of  the  function 
of  suggestion.  It  is  the  result  of  regulation  of  the  conditions 


REFLECTIVE  THINKING  AN  AIM  25 

under  which  observation  and  inference  take  place.  When 
such  regulation  is  absent,  dreams,  the  position  of  stars,  the 
lines  of  the  hand,,  are  regarded  as  valuable  signs,  and  the 
fall  of  cards  as  an  inevitable  omen,  while  natural  events 
of  the  most  crucial  significance  go  disregarded.  Hence  be¬ 
liefs  in  portents  of  various  kinds,  now  mere  nook-and-cranny 
superstitions,  were  once  universal.  A  long  discipline  in  exact 
science  was  required  for  their  conquest. 

The  General  Causes  of  Bad  Thinking:  Bacon’s  “Idols” 

It  is  instructive  to  note  some  of  the  attempts  that  have 
been  made  to  classify  the  main  sources  of  error  in  reaching 
beliefs.  Francis  Bacon,  for  example,  at  the  beginning  of 
modern  scientific  inquiry,  enumerated  four  such  classes, 
under  the  somewhat  fantastic  title  of  "  idols  ”  (Gr.  etfiuXa, 
images),  spectral  forms  that  allure  the  mind  into  false 
paths.  These  he  called  the  idols,  or  phantoms,  of  (o)  the 
tribe,  (b)  the  market  place,  (c)  the  cave  or  den,  and  (d) 
the  theatre;  or,  less  metaphorically,  (a)  standing  errone¬ 
ous  methods  (or  at  least  temptations  to  error)  that  have  their 
roots  in  human  nature  generally,  (b)  those  that  come  from 
intercourse  and  language,  (c)  those  that  are  due  to  causes 
peculiar  to  a  specific  individual,  and  finally,  (d)  those 
that  have  their  sources  in  the  fashion  or  general  current 
of  a  period.  Classifying  these  causes  of  fallacious  belief 
somewhat  differently,  we  may  say  that  two  are  intrinsic 
and  two  are  extrinsic.  Of  the  intrinsic,  one  is  common  to 
all  men  alike  (such  as  the  universal  tendency  to  notice 
instances  that  corroborate  a  favorite  belief  more  readily 
than  those  that  contradict  it),  while  the  other  resides  in 
the  specific  temperament  and  habits  of  the  given  individual. 
Of  the  extrinsic,  one  proceeds  from  generic  social  condi¬ 
tions —  like  the  tendency  to  suppose  that  there  is  a  fact 
wherever  there  is  a  word,  and  no  fact  where  there  is  no 


26  HOW  WE  THINK 

linguistic  term  —  while  the  other  proceeds  from  local  and 

temporary  social  currents. 

Locke  on  Typical  Forms  of  Wrong  Belief 

Locke’s  method  of  dealing  with  typical  forms  of  wrong 
belief  is  less  formal  and  may  be  more  enlightening.  We 
can  hardly  do  better  than  quote  his  forcible  and  quaint 
language,  when,  enumerating  different  classes  of  men,  he 
shows  different  ways  in  which  thought  goes  wrong; 

(а)  The  first  is  of  those  who  seldom  reason  at  all,  but  do 
and  think  according  to  the  example  of  others,  whether  parents, 
neighbors,  ministers,  or  who  else  they  are  pleased  to  make 
choice  of  to  have  an  implicit  faith  in,  for  the  saving  of  them¬ 
selves  the  pains  and  troubles  of  thinking  and  examining  for 
themselves. 

(б)  This  kind  is  of  those  who  put  pas.sion  in  the  place  of 
reason,  and  being  resolved  that  shall  govern  their  actiQn.s  and 
arguments,  neither  use  their  own,  nor  hearken  to  other  imoplc’s 
reason,  any  farther  than  it  suits  their  humor,  interest,  or 
party, “ 

(c)  The  third  sort  is  of  those  who  readily  and  .sincerely 
follow  reason,  but  for  want  of  having  that  whicli  one  may 
call  large,  sound,  roundabout  sense,  have  not  a  full  viPAv  of 
all  that  relates  to  the  question.  .  .  .  They  converse  but  with 
one  sort  of  men,  they  read  but  one  sort  of  books,  they  will  not 
come  in  the  hearing  but  of  one  sort  of  notions,  .  .  .  They 
have  a  pretty  traffic  with  known  correspondents  in  some  little 
creek  .  .  ,  but  will  not  venture  out  into  the  great  ocean  of 
knowledge.  [Men  of  originally  equal  natural  parts  may  finally 

“  In  another  place  Locke  says :  "  Men’s  prejudices  and  inclinations 
impose  often  upon  themselves.  .  .  .  Inclination  suggests  and  slides 
into  discourse  favorable  terms,  which  introduce  favorable  ideas;  till 
at  last  by  this  means  that  is  concluded  clear  and  evident,  thus  dressed 
up,  which,  taken  in  its  native  state,  by  making  use  of  none  but  precise 
determined  ideas,  would  find  no  admittance  at  all." 


REFLECTIVE  THINKING  AN  AIM  27 

arrive  at  very  different  stores  of  knowledge  and  truth]  when 
all  the  odds  between  them  has  been  the  different  scope  that 
has  been  given  to  their  understandings  to  range  in,  for  the 
gathering  up  of  information  and  furnishing  their  heads  with 
ideas  and  notions  and  observations,  whereon  to  employ  their 
mind.* 

In  another  portion  of  his  writings,®  Locke  states  the  same 
ideas  in  slightly  different  form. 

1.  That  which  is  inconsistent  with  our  principles  is  so  far 
from  passing  for  probable  with  us  that  it  will  not  be  allowed 
possible.  The  reverence  borne  to  these  principles  is  so  great, 
and  their  authority  so  paramount  to  all  other,  that  the  testi¬ 
mony,  not  only  of  other  men,  but  the  evidence  of  our  own 
senses  are  often  rejected,  when  they  offer  to  vouch  anything 
contrary  to  these  established  rules.  .  .  .  There  is  nothing  more 
ordinary  than  children’s  receiving  into  their  minds  proposi¬ 
tions  .  .  .  from  their  parents,  nurses,  or  those  about  them; 
which  being  insinuated  in  their  unwary  as  well  as  unbiased 
understandings,  and  fastened  by  degrees,  are  at  last  (and  this 
whether  true  or  false)  riveted  there  by  long  custom  and  edu¬ 
cation,  beyond  all  possibility  of  being  pulled  out  again.  For 
men,  when  they  are  grown  up,  reflecting  upon  their  opinions 
and  finding  those  of  this  sort  to  be  as  ancient  in  their  minds 
as  their  very  memories,  not  having  observed  their  early  in¬ 
sinuation,  nor  by  what  means  they  got  them,  they  are  apt  to 
reverence  them  as  sacred  things,  and  not  to  suffer  them  to  be 
profaned,  touched,  or  questioned.  [They  take  them  as  stand¬ 
ards]  to  be  the  great  and  unerring  deciders  of  truth  and  false¬ 
hood,  and  the  judges  to  which  they  are  to  appeal  in  all  manner 
of  controversies. 

2.  Secondly,  next  to  these  are  men  whose  understandings  are 
cast  into  a  mold,  and  fashioned  just  to  the  size  of  a  received 
hypothesis.  [Such  men,  while  not  denying  the  existence  of  facts 

*  The  Conduct  oj  the  Understanding,  §  3. 

s  Essay  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  Bk.  TV,  Ch,  XX,  "  Of 
Wrong  Assent  or  Error.” 


28  HOW  WE  THINK 

and  evidence,  cannot  be  convinced  even  by  the  evidence  that 
■would  decide  them  if  their  minds  were  not  so  closed  by  ad¬ 
herence  to  fixed  belief.] 

3,  Predominant  Pa^ions.  Thirdly,  probabilities  which  cross 
men’s  appetites  and  prevailing  passions  run  the  same  fate, 
Let  ever  so  much  probability  hang  on  one  side  of  a  covetous 
man's  reasoning,  and  money  on  the  other,  it  i.s  easy  to  fore¬ 
see  which  will  outweigh.  Earthly  minds,  like  mud  walls,  resist 
the  strongest  batteries, 

4.  Authority.  The  fourth  and  lost  wrong  measure  of  proba¬ 
bility  I  shall  take  notice  of,  and  which  keeps  in  ignorance  or 
error  more  people  than  all  the  othere  together,  is  the  giving  up 
our  assent  to  the  common  received  opinions,  either  of  our 
friends  or  party,  neighborhood  or  country. 

Importance  of  Attitudes 

We  have  quoted  from  influential  thinkers  of  the  past,  But 
the  facts  to  which  they  refer  are  familiar  in  our  everyday 
experience.  Any  observant  person  can  note  any  day,  both  in 
himself  and  in  others,  the  tendency  to  believe  that  which  is 
in  harmony  with  desire.  We  take  that  to  be  tnic  which  we 
should  like  to  have  so,  and  ideas  that  go  contrary  to  our 
hopes  and  wishes  have  difficulty  in  getting  lodgment.  We  all 
jump  to  conclusions;  we  all  fail  to  examine  and  test  our 
ideas  because  of  our  personal  attitudes.  When  we  generalize, 
we  tend  to  make  sweeping  assertions;  that  is,  from  one 
or  only  a  few  facts  we  make  a  generalization  covering  a 
wide  field.  Observation  also  reveals  the  powerful  influence 
wielded  by  social  influenced  that  have  actually  nothing  to 
do  with  the  truth  or  falsity  of  what  is  asserted  and  denied. 
Some  of  the  dispositions  that  give  these  irrelevant  influ¬ 
ences  power  to  limit  and  mislead  thought  are  good  in  them¬ 
selves,  a  fact  that  renders  the  need  of  training  the  more 
important.  Heverence  for  parents  and  regard  for  those 
placed  in  authority  are  in  the  abstract  surely  valuable  traits. 


REFLECTIVE  THINKING  AN  AIM  29 

Yet,  aa  Locke  points  out,  they  are  among  the  chief  forces 
that  determine  beliefs  apart  from  and  even  eontrary  to  the 
operations  of  intelligent  thought.  The  desire  to  be  in  har¬ 
mony  with  others  is  in  itself  a  desirable  trait.  But  it  may 
lead  a  person  too  readily  to  fall  in  with  the  prejudices  of 
others  and  may  weaken  his  independence  of  judgment.  It 
even  leads  to  an  extreme  partisanship  that  regards  it  as  dis¬ 
loyal  to  question  the  beliefs  of  a  group  to  which  one  belongs. 

Because  of  the  importance  of  attitudes,  ability  to  train 
thought  is  not  achieved  merely  by  knowledge  of  the  best 
forms  of  thought.  Possession  of  this  information  is  no  guar¬ 
antee  for  ability  to  think  well.  Moreover,  there  are  no  set 
exercises  in  correct  thinlcing  whose  repeated  performance 
will  cause  one  to  be  a  good  thinlcer.  The  information  and 
the  exercises  are  both  of  value.  But  no  individual  realizes 
their  value  except  as  he  is  personally  animated  by  certain 
dominant  attitudes  in  his  own  character.  It  was  once  almost 
universally  believed  that  the  mind  had  faculties,  like  mem¬ 
ory  and  attention,  that  could  be  developed  by  repeated  ex¬ 
ercise,  as  gymnastic  exercises  are  supposed  to  develop  the 
muscles.  This  belief  is  now  generally  discredited  in  the 
large  sense  in  which  it  was  once  held.  Similarly  it  is  highly 
questionable  whether  the  practice  of  thinking  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  some  logical  formula  results  in  creation  of  a  gen¬ 
eral  habit  of  thinking;  namely,  one  applicable  over  a  wide 
range  of  subjects.  It  is  a  matter  of  common  notice  that  men 
who  are  expert  thinkers  in  their  own  special  fields  adopt 
views  on  other  matters  without  doing  the  inquiring  that 
they  know  to  be  necessary  for  substantiating  simpler  facts 
that  fall  within  their  own  specialities. 

The  Union  of  Attitude  and  Skilled  Method 

What  can  be  done,  however,  is  to  cultivate  those  attitudes^ 
that  are  favorable  to  the  use  of  tlfie  best  meffiods  of  in- 


30  HOW  WE  THINK 

quiry  and  testing.  Knowledge  of  the  inetluids  alone  will 
not  suffice;  there  must  be  the  desire,  the  will,  to  employ 
them,  This  desire  is  an  affair  of  personal  di.sposition.  But 
on  the  other  hand  the  disposition  alone  will  not  suffice, 
There  must  also  be  undenetanding  of  the  form.*)  and  tech¬ 
niques  that  are  the  channels  through  which  tlie.se  attitudes 
operate  to  the  be,st  advantage.  Since  these  forin.s  and  tech¬ 
niques  will  be  taken  up  for  diBcus.sion  later,  we  .‘iliall  here 
mention  the  attitudes  tliatncod  to  be  cultivated  in  order  to 
secure  their  adoption  and  uac._^ 

Open-mindedness.  This  attitude  may  be  defined  as 
freedom  from  prejudice,  partisanship,  and  .«uch  other  hab¬ 
its  as  close  the  mind  and  make  it  unwilling  to  consider  new 
problems  and  entertain  newldcps.  But  it  is  something  more 
active  and*‘p’Q3itive  than  these  words  suggest.  It  is  very  dif¬ 
ferent  from  empty-mindedness.  While  it  as  hospitality  to  new 
themes,  facts,  ideas,  questions,  it  i.s  not  the  kind  of  hospi¬ 
tality  that  would  be  indicated  by  hanging  out  a  sign;  "  Come 
right  in;  there  is  nobody  at  home.”  It  includes  an  active 
desire  to  listen  to  more  sides  than  one;  to  give  liced  to  facts 
from  whatever  source  they  come;  to  give  full  attention  to 
alternative  possibilities;  to  recognize  the  po.s.sibility  of  error 
even  in  the  beliefs  that  are  dearest  to  u.s.  Mental  sluggish¬ 
ness  is  one  great  factor  in  closing  the  mind  to  new  ideas. 
The  path  of  least  resistance  and  least  trouble  i.s  a  mental  rut 
already  made.  It  requires  troublesome  work  to  undertake 
the  alteration  of  old  beliefs.  Self-conceit  often  regards  it 
as  a  sign  of  weakness  to  admit  that  a  belief  to  which  we 
have  once  committed  ourselves  is  wrong.  We  get  so  identi¬ 
fied  with  an  idea  that  it  is  literally  a  ‘  pet '  notion  and  we 
rise  to  its  defense  and  stop  our  mental  eyes  and  cars  to  any¬ 
thing  different  Unconscious  fears  also  drive  us  into  purely 
defensive  attitudes  that  operate  like  a  coat  of  armor  not 
only  to  shut  out  new  conceptions  but  even  to  prevent  us 


REFLECTIVE  THINKING  AN  AIM  31 

from  making  a  new  observation.  The  cumulative  effect  of 
these  forces  is  to  shut  in  the  mind,  and  to  create  a  withdrawal 
from  new  intellectual  contacts  that  are  needed  for  learn¬ 
ing.  They  can  best  be  fought  by  cultivating  that  alert  curi¬ 
osity  and  spontaneous  outreaching  for  the  new  which  is  the 
essence  of  the  open  mind.  The  mind  that  is  open  merely  in 
the  sense  that  it  passively  pei'mits  things  to  trickle  in  and 
through  will  not  be  able  to  resist  the  factors  that  make  for 
meptal  closure.  . 

s/b.  Whole-heartednesslWhen  anyone  is  thoroughly  inter¬ 
ested  in  some  object  and  cause,  he  throws  himself  into  it; 
he  does  so,  as  we  say,  ‘  heartily,’  or  with  a  whole  heart- 
The  importance  of  this  attitude  or  disposition  is  generally 
recognized  in  practical  and  moral  affairs.  But  it  is  equally 
important  in  intellectual  development.  There  is  no  greater 
enemy  of  effective  thinking  than  divided  interest.  This  divi¬ 
sion  unfortunately  is  often  produced  in  school.  A  pupil  gives 
an  external,  perfunctory  attention  to  the  teacher  and  to  his 
book  and  lesson  while  his  inmost  thoughts  are  concerned 
with  matters  more  attractive  to  him.  He  pays  attention  with 
ear  or  eye,  but  his  brain  is  occupied  with  affairs  that  make 
an  immediate  appeal.  He  feels  obliged  to  study  because  he 
has  to  recite,  to  pass  an  examination,  to  make  a  grade,  or 
because  he  wishes  to  please  his  teacher  or  his  parents.  But 
the  material  does  not  hold  him  by  its  pwji.,p.ower.  His  ap¬ 
proach  is  not  straightforward  and  single-minded.  This  point 
may  in  some  cases  seem  trivial.  But  in  others  it  may  be 
very  serious.  It  then  contributes  to  the  formation  of  a  gen¬ 
eral  habit  or  attitude  that  is  most  unfavorable  to  good 
thinking. 

C^When  af  person  is  absorbed,  the  subject  carries  him  on. 
Questions  occur  to  him  spontaneously;  a  flood  of  sugges¬ 
tions  pour  in  on  him ;  further  inquiries  and  readings  are  in¬ 
dicated  and  followed;  instead  of  having  to  use  his  energy 


32  HOW  WE  THINK 

to  hold  his  mind  to  the  Bubjcct  (thereby  lessening  that 
which  is  available  for  the  subject,  itself,  and  creating  a 
divided  state  of  mind),  the  material  holds  and  buoys  his 
mind  up  and  gives  an  onward  impetus  to  thinking.  A  genu¬ 
ine  enthusiasm  is  an  attitude  that  operate.s  a.s  an  intellec¬ 
tual  force.  A  teacher  who  arouses  such  an  enthusiasm  in 
his  pupils  has  done  .something  that  no  amount  of  formalized 
method,  no  matter  how  correct,  can  accompli.'slu 
\ie.  Responsibility.  (Like  sincerity  or  ■whole-hciirtcdneas, 
responsibility  is  usually  conceived  a.s  a  rnoi'ul  trait  rather 
than  as  an  intellectual  resource.  But  it  is  an  attitude  that 
is  necessary  to  win  the  adequate  support  of  desire  for  new 
points  of  view  and  new  ideas  and  of  enthu.siasm  for  and 
capacity  for  absorption  in  subject  matter,  Thc.se  gifts  may 
run  wild,  or  at  least  they  may  lead  the  mind  to  spread  out 
too  far.  They  do  not  of  themselves  ensure  that  centraliza¬ 
tion,  that  unity,  which  is  e.?sential  to  good  thinking.  To  be 
intellectually  responsible  is  to  consider  the  consequences 
of  a  projected  step;  it  means  to  be  willing  to  adopt  these 
consequences  when  they  follow  reasonably  from  any  posi¬ 
tion  already  taken.  Intellectual  responsibilit}'’  secures  in¬ 
tegrity;  that  is  to  say,  consistency  and  harmony  in  belief. 
It  is  not  uncommon  to  see  persons  continue  to  accept  beliefs 
whose  logical  consequences  they  refuse  to  acknowledge. 
They  profess  certain  beliefs  but  arc  unwilling  to  commit 
themselves  to  the  consequences  that  flow  from  them.  The 
result  is  mental  confusion.  The  '  split '  inevitably  reacts 
upon  the  mind  to  blur  its  insight  and  weaken  its  firmness 
of  grasp;  no  one  can  use  two  inconsistent  mental  standards 
without  losing  some  of  his  mental  grip.^iVhen  pupils  study 
subjects  that  are  too  remote  from  their  experience,  that 
arouse  no  active  curiosity,  and  that  are  beyond  their  power 
of  understanding,  they  begin  to  use  a  measure  of  value  and 
of  reality  for  school  subjects  different  from  the  measure 


KEFLECTIVE  thinking  an  aim  33 
they  employ  for  affairs  of  life  that  make  a  vital  appe  1 
They  tend  to  become  intellectually  irresponsible;  the  do 
not  ask  for  the  meaning  of  what  they  learn,  in  the  sense  of 
what  difference  it  makes  to  the  rest  of  their  beliefs  and  to 
their  actions.  J 

The  same  £hing  happens  when  such  a  multitude  of  sub 
jects  or  disconnected  facts  is  forced  upon  the  mind  that 
the  student  does  not  have  time  and  opportunity  to  wei 
their  meaning.  He  fancies  he  is  accepting  them,  is  believin? 
them,  when  in  fact  his  belief  is  of  a  totally  different  kind 
and  implies  a  different  measure  of  reality  from  that  which 
operates  in  his  life  and  action  out  of  school.  He  then  be 
comes  mentally  mixed;  mixed  not  only  about  particular 
things  but  also  about  the  basic  reasons  that  make  thin 
worthy  of  belief.  Fewer  subjects  and  fewer  facts  and  more 
responsibility  for  thinking  the  material  of  those  subjects 
and  facts  thrmigh  to  realize  what  they  involve  would  give 
better  results.VTo  carry  something  through  to  completion  is 
the  real  meaning  of  thoroughness,  and  power  to  carry  a 
thing  through  to  its  end  or  conclusion  is  dependent  upon  the 
existence  of  the  attitude  of  intellectual  responsibility^ 


The  Bearing  of  These  Personal  Attitudes  upon  Readiness 

to  Think 

\The  three  attitudes  that  have  been  mentioned,  open- 
mihdedness,  whole-hearted  or  absorbed  interest,  respongi- 
bility  in  facing  consequences,  are  of  themselves  personal 
qualities,  traits  of  character^  They  are  not  the  only  atti¬ 
tudes  that  are  important  in  order  that  the  habit  of  thinking 
in  a  reflective  way  may  be  developed.  But  the  other  atti¬ 
tudes  that  might  be  set  forth  are  also  traits  of  character 
attitudes  that,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  are  moral 
since  they  are  traits  of  personal  character  that  have  to  be 
cultivated  Any  person  thinks  at  times  on  particular  sub- 


34  HOW  WE  THINK 

jects  that  arouee  him.  Other  persona  have  habits  of  think¬ 
ing  quite  persistently  in  special  fields  of  interest;  on  mat¬ 
ters,  for  example,  that  arc  their  professional  concern,  A 
thoroughgoing  habit  of  thinking  is,  however,  more  extended 
in  its  scope!  No  one  can  think  about  everj'thing,  to  be  sure; 
no  one  can  think  about  am/thing  without  experience  and 
information  about  it,  Nevertheless,  there  is  such  a  thing  as 
readiness  to  consider  in  a  thoughtful  way  the  subjects  that 
do  come  within  the  range  of  experience  —  a  rcadim!s,s  that 
contrasts  strongly  with  the  disposition  to  pass  iudgment  on 
the  basis  of  mere  custom,  tradition,  prejudice,  etc.,  and  thus 
shun  the  task  of  thinkings  The  personal  attitude, s  that  have 
been  named  are  essential  constituents  of  this  general 
readiness. 

If  we  were  compelled  to  make  a  choice  between  these 
personal  attitudes  and  knowledge  about  the  principles  of 
logical  reasoning  together  with  some  degree  of  technical 
skill  in  manipulating  special  logical  processes,  we  should 
decide  for  the  former.  Fortunately  no  such  choice  has  to  be 
made,  because  there  is  no  opposition  between  personal  at¬ 
titudes  and  logical  processes,  We  only  need  to  bear  in  mind 
that,  with  respect  to  the  aims  of  education,  no  separation 
can  be  made  between  impersonal,  abstract  principles  of 
logic  and  moral  qualities  of  character.  What  is  needed  is  to 
weave  them  into  unity. 


CHAPTER  THREE 


NATIVE  RESOURCES  IN  TRAIN¬ 
ING  THOUGHT 


We  have  just  discussed  the  values  to  be  obtained  by  edu¬ 
cating  the  mind  in  habits  of  thought  and  some  of  the  ob¬ 
stacles  that  lie  in  the  way  of  its  development.  But  nothing 
can  grow  except  from  gerrns,  from  potentialities  th_at  tend 
to  som^e,  deyelopment  of  themselves.  There  must  be  a  native 
.stpekg  or  capital,  of  resources;  we  cannot  force  the  power  to 
think  upon  any  creature  that  does  not  first  think  spdhtaiie-’ 
ously,  ‘  naturally,’  as  we  say.  But  while  we  cannot  learn  or 
be  taught  to  think,  we  do  have  to  learn  how  to  think  well, 
especially  how  to  acquire  the  general  habit  of  reflecting. 
Since  this  habit  grows  out  of  original  native  tendencies,  the 
teacher  needs  to  know  something  about  the  nature  of  the 
primary  capital  stock  that  constitutes  the  germs  out  of 
which  alone  the  habit  is  to  be  developed.  Xlnless  we  know,, 
what  there  is  to  be  laid  hold  of  and  used,  we  work  in  the 
dark  and  waste  time  and  energy.  We  shall  probably  do 
something  even  worse,  striving  to  impose  some  unnatural 
habit  from  without  instead  of  directing  native  tendencies 
toward  their  own  best  fruition. 

Teaching  may  be  compared  to  selling  commodities.  No 
one  can  selLunleas.  someone  buys.  We  should  ridicule  a  mer¬ 
chant  who  said  that  he  had  sold  a  great  many  goods  al¬ 
though  no  one  had  bought  any.  But  perhaps  there  are  teach¬ 
ers  who  think  that  they  have  doiie  a  goo J  day’s  teaching" 
irrespective  of  what  pupils  have  learned.  There  is  the  same 


gg  HOW  WE  THINK 

exact  equation  between  tcacbing  and  learning  that  there  is 
between  selling  and  buying.  The  only  way  to  increase  the 
learning  of  pupils  is  to  augment  the  quantity  and  quality  of 
real  teaching.  Since  learning  is  something  that  the  pupil 
has  to  do  himself  and  for  himself,  the  initiative  lies  with 
the  learner.  The  teacher  is  a  guide  and  director;  he  .steers 
the  boat,  but  the  energy  that  propels  it  must  come  from 
those  who  are  learning.  The  more  a  teacher  is  aware  of  the 
past  experiences  of  students,  of  their  hopes,  desires,  chief 
mterests,  the  better  will  he  understand  the,  forces  at  work 
that  need  to  be*  directed  and  utilized  for  the  formation  of 
reflective *&a*Eit3.  The  number  and  qviality  of  the.se  factors 
vary  from  person  to  person.  They  cannot  therefore  be  cate- 
goricaUy  enumerated  in  a  book.  But  there  are  some  tenden¬ 
cies  and  forces  that  operate  in  every  normal  individual, 
forces  that  must  be  appealed  to  and  utilized  if  the  best 
methods  for  the  development  of  good  habits  of  thought  are 
to  be  employed, 

I.  OmtlOBITY 

Every  living  creature,  while  it  is  awake,  is  in  constant 
interaction  with  its  surroundings.  It  is  engaged  in  a  process 
of  give  and  take,  of  doing  something  to  objects  around  it 
and  receiving  back  something  from  them  —  impreasiona, 
stimuli.  This  process  of  interacting  constitutes  the  framc- 
^*3  are  fitted  out  with  devices  that  help 
us  ward  off  destructive  influences,  devices  that  intercept 
harmful  influences  and  protect  us  from  them.  But  we  also 
have  tendencies  that  are  forward-reaching  and  out-reaching, 
that  go  out  to  make  new  contacts,  that  seek  new  objects, 
that  strive  to  vary  old  objects,  that  revel,  as  it  were,  in  ex- 
Iperiences  for  their  own  sake  and  so  are  ceaselessly  active 
Sn  enlarging  the  range  of  experience.  These  various  tenden¬ 
cies  arg  summed  up  in  curiosity.  Wordsworth’s  saying  ap¬ 
plies  particularly  to  childhood; 


RESOURCES  IN  TRAINING  THOUGHT  37 

The  eye  —  it  cannot  choose  but  see ; 

We  cannot  bid  the  ear  be  still; 

Our  bodies  feel,  where’er  they  be, 

Against  or  with  our  will. 

All  our  sense  and  motor  organs  are,  when  we  are  awake, 
acting  and  being  acted  upon  by  something  in  the  environ¬ 
ment.  With  adults  many  of  these  contacts  have  been  made; 
grown-ups  permit  themselves  to  become  stale;  they  fall 
into  ruts  of  experience  and  are  contented  with  what  hap¬ 
pens  in  these  ruts.  To  children  the  whole  world  is  new; 
there  is  something  thrilling  to  the  healthy  being  in  every 
new  contact  and  it  is  eagerly  sought  for,  not  merely  pas¬ 
sively  awaited  and  endured.  There  is  no  single  faculty  called 
‘  curiosity  ’;  every  normal  organ  of  sense  and  of  motor  ac¬ 
tivity  is  on  the  qui  vive.  It  wants  a  chance  to  be  active, 
and  it  needs  some  object  in  order  to  act.  The  sum  total 
of  these  outgoing  tendencies  constitutes  curiosity.  It  is  the 
basic  factor  in  enlargement  of  experience  and  therefore  a 
prime  ingredient  in  the  germs  that  are  to  be  developed  into 
reflective  thinking. 

Three  Stages,  or  Levels,  of  Curiosity 

1.  In  the  first  manifestations,  curiosity  is  far  removed 
from  thinking.  It  is  a  vital  overflow,  an  expression  of  an 
abundant  organic  energy.  A  physiological  uneasiness  leads 
a  child  to  get  ‘  into  everything,’  —  to  be  reaching,  poking, 
pounding,  prying.  Observers  of  animals  have  noted  what 
one  author  calls  "  their  inveterate  tendency  to  fool.”  “  Rats 
run  about,  smell,  dig,  or  gnaw,  without  real  reference  to  the 
business  in  hand.  In  the  same  way  Jack  [a  dog]  scrambles 
and  jumps,  the  kitten  wanders  and  picks,  the  otter  slips 
about  everywhere  like  ground  lightning,  the  elephant  fum¬ 
bles  ceaselessly,  the  monkey  pulls  things  about.”  ^  The  most 
1  .Hobtouae,  Mind  in  Evolution,  p.  195. 


gg  HOW  WE  THINK 

casual  observation  of  the  activities  of  a  yoiinf;;  child  reveals 
a  ceaseless  display  of  exploring  and  testing  activity.  Objects 
are  sucked,  fingered,  and  thumped;  drawn  and  pushed ;  han¬ 
dled  and  thrown;  in  short,  they  are  experimented  \vith  until 
they  cease  to  yield  new  qualities.  Such  activities  are  liardly 
intellectual,  and  yet  without  them  intellectual  activity 
would  be  feeble  and  intermittent  through  lack  of  stuff  for 
its  operations. 

2.  A  higher  stage  of  curiosity  devclop.s  under  the  influ¬ 
ence  of  social  stimuli.  When  the  child  learns  that  he,  can 
appeal  to  others  to  eke  out  his  store  of  ti.xiicricnccs,  so 
that,  if  objects  fail  to  respond  interestingly  to  his  experi¬ 
ments,  he  may  call  upon  persons  to  provide  interc?sting  ma¬ 
terial,  a  new  epoch  sets  in.  “What  is  that?  "  “  Why?  “  be¬ 
come  the  unfailing  signs  of  a  child’s  presence.  At  fir.st  this 
questioning  is  hardly  more  than  a  projection  into  social 
relations  of  the  physical  overflow  that  earlier  kept  the 
child  pushing  and  pulling,  opening  and  shutting.  lie  a.sk8 
in  succession  what  holds  up  the  house,  what  hold.s  up  the 
soil  that  holds  the  house,  what  holds  up  the  earth  that  holds 
the  soil;  but  his  questions  are  not  evidence  of  any  genuine, 
consciousness  of  rational  connections.  His  why  is  not  a  de¬ 
mand  for  scientific  explanation ;  the  motive  behind  it  is  sim¬ 
ply  eagerness  for  a  larger  acquaintance  with  the  mysteri¬ 
ous  world  in  which  he  is  placed.  The  search  is  not  for  a 
law  or  principle,  but  only  for  another,  a  bigger  fact.  Yet 
there  is  more  than  a  desire  to  accumulate  just  information 
or  heap  up  disconnected  items  —  although  Bometinre.s  the 
interrogating  habit  threatens  to  degenerate  into  a  mere  dis¬ 
ease  of  language.  In  the  feeling,  however  dim,  that  the  facta 
which  directly  meet  the  senses  are  not  the  whole  stoiy,  that 
there  is  more  behind  them  and  more  to  come  from  them, 
lies  the  germ  of  intellectual  curiosity. 

3.  Curiosity  rises  above  the  organic  and  the  social  level 


BESOURCBS  IN  TRAINING  THOUGHT  39 
and  becomea  intellectual  in  the  degree  in  which  it  is  trans¬ 
formed  into  interest  in  finding  out  for  oneself  the  answers 
to  questions  that  are  aroused  by  contact  with  persons  and 
things.  In  what  was  just  called  the  “  social  ”  stage,  children 
are  often  more  interested  in  the  mere  process  of  asking  a 
question  than  they  are  in  giving  heed  to  the  answer.  At  all 
events  no  particular  question  is  attended  to  for  very  long; 
one  asking  succeeds  another  so  fast  that  none  is  developed 
into  a  train  of  thought.  Immediate  asking  and  answering 
discharges  curiosity.  The  crucial  problem  for  the  educator, 
whether  parent  or  school  teacher,  is  to  utilize  for  intellectual 
purposes  the  organic  curiosity  of  physical  exploration  and 
linguistic  interrogation.  This  can  be  accomplished  by  at¬ 
taching  them  to  ends  that  are  more  remote,  that  require 
finding  and  inserting  intermediate  acta,  objects,  and  ideas. 
To  the  degree  that  a  distant  end  controls  a  sequence  of  in¬ 
quiries  and  observations  and  binds  them  together  as  means 
to  an  end,  just  to  that  degree  does  curiosity  assume  a  defi¬ 
nitely  intellectual  character. 

How  Curiosity  Is  Lost 

Unless  transition  to  an  intellectual  plane  is  effected,  curi¬ 
osity  degenerates  or  evaporates.  Bacon’s  saying  that  we 
must  become  as  little  children  in  order  to  enter  the  king¬ 
dom  of  science  is  at  once  a  reminder  of  the  open-minded 
and  flexible  wonder  of  childhood  and  of  the  ease  with  which 
this  endowment  is  lost.  Some  lose  it  in  indifference  or  care¬ 
lessness;  others  in  a  frivolous  flippancy;  many  escape  these 
evils  only  to  become  incased  in  a  hard  dogmatism  that  is 
equally  fatal  to  the  spirit  of  wonder.  Some  are  so  taken  up 
with  routine  as  to  be  inaccessible  to  new  facts  and  problems. 
Others  retain  curiosity  only  with  reference  to  what  concerns 
their  personal  advantage  in  their  chosen  career.  With  many, 
curiosity  is  arrested  on  the  plane  of  interest  in  local  gossip 


40  HOW  WE  THINK 

and  in  the  fortunes  of  their  neighbors;  indeed,  so  usual  is 
this  result  that  very  often  the  first  association  with  the 
^word  curiosity  is  a  prying  intiuisitiveness  into  otlier  people's 
Ibusiness.  With  respect,  then,  to  curiosity,  the  teacher  has 
fusually  more  to  learn  than  to  teach.  Rarely  can  he  aspire 
|to  the  office  of  kindling  or  even  of  increasing  it;  his  prov¬ 
ince  is  rather  to  provide  the  materials  and  the  conditions  by 
which  organic  curiosity  will  be  directed  into  invo.stigations 
that  have  an  aim  and  that  produce  results  in  the  way  of 
increase  of  knowdedge,  and  by  which  social  incpu.sitivenesB 
will  be  converted  into  ability  to  find  out  things  known  to 
others,  an  ability  to  ask  questions  of  books  as  well  as  of 
persons.  The  teacher  has  to  protect  the  growing  person 
from  those  conditions  which  occa.sion  a  mere  .succession  of 
excitements  which  have  no  cumulative  effect,  and  which, 
therefore,  make  an  individual  either  a  lover  of  sensations 
and  sensationalism  or  leave  him  bla.se  and  uninterested.  He 
has  to  avoid  all  dogmatism  in  in.struction,  for  such  a  course 
gradually  but  surely  creates  the  impression  that  everything 
important  is  already  settled  and  nothing  remain, s  to  be 
found  out.  He  has  to  know  how  to  give  information  when 
curiosity  has  created  an  appetite  that  .scck.s  to  be  fed,  and 
how  to  abstain  from  giving  information  when,  because  of 
lack  of  a  questioning  attitude,  it  would  be  a  burden  and 
would  dull  the  sharp  edge  of  the  inquiring  spirit. 


II.  Suggestion 
Ideas  Occur  Spontaneously 

Many  a  child,  as  noted  earlier,  has  tried  to  see  whether  he 
could  not  stop  '  thinking,’  whether  he  could  not  arrest  the 
flow  of  ideas  passing  through  his  head.  But  ‘  thoughts,'  of  this 
rudimentary  and  uncontrolled  sort,  spring  into  being  quite 


EESOURCES  IN  TRAINING  THOUGHT  41 

as  surely  as  “  our  bodies  feel,  where’er  they  be,  against  or 
with  our  will.”  We  cannot  make  ourselves  have  ideas  or  not 
have  them  any  more  than  we  can  directly  make  ourselves 
have  sensations  from  things.  In  the  one  case  as  in  the  other, 
we  can  put  ourselves  or  be  put  by  others  into  situations 
where  we  are  likely  to  have  sensations  and  ideas  in  worth¬ 
while  ways,  in  ways  that  lead  on  to  something  else  and  so 
insure  that  the  person  be  developed  and  recreated  by  them 
and  not  be  exhausted  by  the  mere  having  of  them. 

What  a  Suggestion  Is 

Ideas,  in  this  primitive  and  spontaneous  sense,  are  sug¬ 
gestions.  Nothing  in  experience  is  absolutely  simple,  single, 
and  isolated.  Everything  experienced  comes  to  us  along  with 
some  other  object,  quality,  or  event.  Some  object  is  focal 
and  most  distinct,  but  it  shades  off  into  other  things.  A 
child  may  be  absorbed  in  watching  a  bird;  for  the  bright 
center  of  his  consciousness  there  is  nothing  but  the  bird 
there.  But  of  course  it  is  somewhere  —  on  the  ground,  in  a 
tree.  And  the  actual  experience  includes  much  more.  The 
bird  also  is  doing  something  —  flying,  pecking,  feeding, 
singing,  etc.  And  the  experience  of  the  bird  is  itself  complex, 
not  a  single  sensation;  there  are  numbers  of  related  qual¬ 
ities  included  within  it.  This  highly  elementary  illustra¬ 
tion  indicates  why  it  is  that  the  next  time  a  child  sees  a 
bird,  he  will  ‘  think  ’  of  something  else  that  is  not  then  pres¬ 
ent.  That  is  to  say,  that  portion  of  his  present  experience 
which  is  like  that  of  prior  experience  will  call  up  or  suggest 
some  thing  or  quality  connected  with  it  which  was  present 
in  the  total  previous  experience;  that  thing  or  quality  in 
turn  may  suggest  something  connected  with  itself;  it  not 
only  may  do  so,  but  it  will  do  so  unless  some  new  object 
of  perception  starts  another  train  of  suggestions  going.  In 
this  primary  sense,  then,  the  having  of  ideas  is  not  so  much 


42  HOW  WE  THINK 

aomething  we  do,  as  it  is  something  that  happens  to  us.  Juat 
as,  when  we  open  our  eyes,  we  ece  what  is  there;  so,  when 
auggeetiona  occur  to  ua,  they  come  to  us  as  functions  of  our 
past  experience  and  not  of  our  present  will  and  intention. 
So  far  as  thoughts  in  this  particular  meaning  are  concerned, 
it  ia  true  to  say  "  it  thinks  ’’  (as  we  say  "  it  rains  ") ,  rather 
than  “  I  think."  Only  when  a  person  trie.s  to  get  control  of 
the  conditions  that  dctenninc  the  occurrence  of  a  suggestion, 
and  only  when  he  accepts  responsibility  for  using  the  sug¬ 
gestion  to  see  wliat  follow'a  from  it,  is  it  .significant  to  in¬ 
troduce  the  'I  ’  as  the  agent  and  source  of  thought. 

The  Dimensions  of  Suggestion 

Suggestion  has  a  variety  of  aspects  (or  ‘  dimensions,'  as 
wo  may  term  them),  varying  in  different  persons,  both  in 
themselves  and  in  their  mode  of  combination.  These  dimen¬ 
sions  are  (a)  ease,  or  promptness;  (6)  range,  or  variety; 
and  (c)  depth,  or  profundity. 

a.  Ease,  or  Proni'ptness.  The  common  cla.ssification  of 
persons  into  the  dull  and  the  bright  is  made  primarily  on 
the  basis  of  the  readiness  or  facility  with  which  suggestions 
follow  upon  the  presentation  of  objects  and  upon  the  liap- 
pening  of  events.  As  the  metaphor  of  '  dull  ’  and  '  bright  ’ 
implies,  some  minds  are  impervious,  or  else  they  absorb  pas¬ 
sively.  Everything  presented  is  lost  in  a  drab  monotony 
that  gives  nothing  back,  But  others  reflect,  or  give  back  in 
varied  lights,  all  that  strikes  upon  them.  The  dull  make 
no  response;  the  bright  flash  back  the  fact  with  an  added 
quality.  An  inert  or  stupid  mind  requires  a  heavy  jolt  or  an 
intense  shock  to  move  it  to  suggestion ;  the  bright  mind  is 
quick,  is  alert,  to  react  with  interpretation  and  suggestion 
of  consequences  to  follow. 

Yet  the  teacher  is  not  entitled  to  assume  stupidity  or  even 
dullness  merely  because  of  unresponsivenesa  to  school  sub- 


RESOURCES  IN  TRAINING  THOUGHT  43 
jecta  or  to  a  lesson  as  presented  by  textbook  or  teacher. 
The  pupil  labeled  '  hopeless  ’  may  react  in  quick  and  lively 
fashion  when  the  thing-in-hand  seems  to  him  worth  while, 
as  some  out-of-school  sport  or  social  affair.  Indeed,  even 
the  school  subject  might  move  him,  were  it  set  in  a  different 
context  and  treated  by  a  different  method.  A  boy  dull  in 
geometry  may  prove  quick  enough  when  he  takes  up  the 
subject  in  connection  with  manual  training;  the  girl  who 
seems  inaccessible  to  historical  facts  may  respond  promptly 
when  it  is  a  question  of  judging  the  character  and  deeds  of 
people  of  her  acquaintance  or  of  fiction.  Barring  physical 
defect  or  impaired  health,  slowness  and  dullness  in  all  di¬ 
rections  are  comparatively  rare.  Moreover,  slowness  of  re¬ 
sponse  is  not  necessarily  dullness;  a  thoughtful  person  waits 
to  think  things  over. 

b.  Range,  or  Variety.  Irrespective  of  the  difference  in 
persons  as  to  the  ease  and  promptness  with  which  they  re¬ 
spond  to  facts,  there  is  a  difference  in  the  number  or  range 
of  the  suggestions  that  occur.  We  speak  truly,  in  some  cases, 
of  the  ‘  flood  '  of  suggestions;  in  others,  there  is  but  a  slender 
‘  trickle.’  Occasionally,  slowness  of  outward  response  is  due 
to  a  great  variety  of  suggestions  that  check  one  another  and 
lead  to  hesitation  and  suspense,  while  a  lively  and  prompt 
suggestion  may  take  such  possession  of  the  mind  as  to  pre¬ 
clude  the  development  of  others.  Too  few  suggestions  indi¬ 
cate  a  dry  and  meager  mental  habit;  when  this  is  joined  to 
great  learning,  the  result  is  a  pedant  or  a  Gradgrind.  Such  a 
person’s  mind  rings  hard;  he  is  likely  to  bore  others  with 
mere  bulk  of  information.  He  contrasts  with  the  person 
whom  we  call  ‘  ripe,’  ‘  juicy,’  and  ‘  mellow.’ 

A  conclusion  reached  after  consideration  of  a  few  alter¬ 
natives  may  be  formally  correct,  but  it  will  not  possess  the 
fullness  and  richness  of  meaning  of  one  arrived  at  after  com¬ 
parison  of  a  greater  variety  of  alteniative  suggestions.  On 


44  HOW  WE  THINK 

the  other  handj  BUggeetione  may  be  too  numerous  and  too 
varied  to  secure  the  beat  discipline  and  development  of  men¬ 
tal  habit.  So  many  suggestions  arise  that  the  person  is  at 
a  loss  to  select  among  them.  He  finds  it  difficult  to  reach 
any  definite  conclusion  and  wanders  more  or  less  helplessly 
among  them.  So  much  suggests  itself  pro  and  con,  one  thing 
leads  on  to  another  so  naturally,  that  he  finds  it  difficult  to 
decide  in  practical  affairs  or  to  conclude  in  matters  of 
theory.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  too  much  thinking,  as  when 
action  is  paralyzed  by  the  multiplicity  of  views  suggested 
by  a  situation.  Or  again,  the  very  number  of  suggestions 
may  be  hostile  to  tracing  logical  sequences  among  them, 
for  it  may  tempt  the  mind  away  from  the  necessaiy  but 
trying  task  of  search  for  real  connections,  into  the  more  con¬ 
genial  occupation  of  embroidering  upon  the  given  facts  a 
tissue  of  agreeable  fancies.  The  best  mental  liabit  involves 
a  balance  between  paucity  and  superfluity  of  suggestions. 

c.  Depth,  or  Projundity.  We  distinguish  between  people 
not  only  upon  the  basis  of  the  quickness  and  variety  of 
their  intellectual  response,  but  also  with  respect  to  the 
plane  upon  which  these  occur  —  the  intrinsic  quality  of  their 
response. 

One  man’s  thought  is  profound,  while  another’s  is  super¬ 
ficial;  one  goes  to  the  roots  of  the  matter,  and  another 
touches  lightly  its  most  external  aspects.  This  phase  of 
thinking  is  perhaps  the  most  untaught  of  all,  and  the  least 
amenable  to  external  influence  whether  for  improvement  or 
harm,  Nevertheless,  the  conditions  of  the  pupil’s  contact 
with  subject  matter  may  be  such  that  he  is  compelled  to 
come  to  quarters  with  its  more  significant  features  or  such 
that  he  is  encouraged  to  deal  with  it  upon  the  basis  of  what 
is  trivial.  The  common  assumptions  that,  if  the  pupil  only 
thinks,  one  thought  is  just  as  good  for  his  mental  discipline 
as  another,  and  that  the  end  of  study  is  the  amassing  of 


RESOURCES  IN  TRAINING  THOUGHT  45 

information  —  both  of  them  tend  to  foster  superficial,  at  the 
expense  of  significant,  thought.  Pupils  who  in  matters  of 
practical  experience  have  a  ready  and  acute  perception  of 
the  difference  between  the  significant  and  the  meaningless 
often  reach  in  school  subjects  a  point  where  all  things  seem 
equally  important  or  equally  unimportant;  where  one  thing 
is  just  as  likely  to  be  true  as  another;  and  where  intellectual 
effort  is  expended,  not  in  discriminating  between  things,  but 
in  trying  to  make  verbal  connections  between  words. 

Depth  and  Slovmess.  Sometimes  slowness  and  depth  of 
response  are  intimately  connected.  Time  is  required  in  order 
to  digest  impressions,  and  translate  them  into  substantial 
ideas. '  Brightness  ’  may  be  but  a  flash  in  the  pan.  The  ‘  slow 
but  sure  ’  person,  whether  man  or  child,  is  one  in  whom  im- 
preisions  sink  and  accumulate,  so  that  thinking  is  done  at  a 
deepr  levelof  value  than  by.those  with  a  lighter  load.  Many 
a  child  is  rebuked  for  jlo^q5S,jMLnot. answering, promptly, 
wKen"  His'forces  are  taking  time  to  gather  themselves  to¬ 
gether  to  deal  effectively  with  tiie  problem  at  hand.  In  such" 
cases,  failure  to  afford  time  and  leisure  encourages,  if  it  does 
not  actually  create,  habits  of  speedy,  but  snapshot  and 
superficial,  judgment.  .The  jepth  to  which  a  sense  of  the 
problem,  of  the  difficulty,  sinks,  determines  the  quality  of 
the  thinking  that  follows;  and  any  habit  of  teaching  that 
encourages  the  pupil  for  the  sake  of  a  successful  recitation 
or  of  a  display  of  memorized  information  to  glide  over  the 
thin  ice  of  genuine  problems  reverses  the  true  method  of 
mind-training. 

\  It  is  profitable  to  study  the  lives  of  men  and  women  who 
achieve  in  adult  life  fine  things  in  their  respective  callings, 
ibut  who  were  called  dull  in  their  school  days.  Sometimes 
’the  early  wrong  judgment  was  due  mainly  to  the  fact  that 
the  direction  in  which  the  child  showed  his  ability  was  not 
one  recognized  by  the  good  old  standards  in  use,  as  in 


HOW  WE  THINK 


46 

the  case  of  Darwin's  interest  in  beetles,  snakes,  and  frogs. 
Sometimes  it  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  child  dwelt 
habitually  on  a  deeper  plane  of  reflection,  than  other  pupils 
— ■  or  than  hia  teachers  —  and  so  did  not  show  to  advantage 
when  prompt  answers  of  the  usual  sort  were  expected.  Some¬ 
times  it  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  pupil's  natural  mode  of 
approach  clashed  habitually  with  that  of  the  text  or  teacher, 
and  the  methods  of  the  latter  were  assumed  to  be  the  abso- 
.lute  basis  of  estimate. 

Thinking  Is  Specific  and  Any  Subject  May  Be  Intellectual 

In  any  event,  it  is  desirable  that  the  teacher  should  rid 
himself  of  the  notion  that '  thinking  ’  is  a  single,  unalterable 
faculty;  that  he  should  recognize  that  it  is  a  terra  denoting 
the  various  ways  in  which  things  acquire  significance  for 
the  individual;  and  that  individuals  differ.  It  is  desirable  to 
expel  also  the  kindred  notion  that  some  subjects  are  inher¬ 
ently  ‘  intellectual,’  and  hence  possessed  of  an  almost  magi¬ 
cal  power  to  train  the  faculty  of  thought.  Thinking  is  spe¬ 
cific,  not  a  machinelike,  ready-made  apparatus  to  be  turned 
indifferently  and  at  will  upon  all  subjects,  as  a  lantern 
throws  its  light  as  may  happen  upon  horses,  streets,  gardens, 
trees,  or  river.  Thinking  is  specific,  in  that  different  things 
suggest  their  own  appropriate  meanings,  tell  their  own 
unique  stories,  and  do  this  in  very  different  ways  with  dif¬ 
ferent  persons.  As  the  growth  of  the  body  is  through  the 
assimilation  of  food,  so  the  growth  of  the  mind  is  through 
the  logical  organization  of  subject  matter.  Thinking  is  not 
like  a  sausage  machine  that  reduces  all  materials  indiffer¬ 
ently  to  one  stereotyped,  marketable  commodity,  but  is  the 
power  of  following  up  and  linking  together  the  specific  sug¬ 
gestions  that  specific  things  arouse.  Accordingly,  any  sub¬ 
ject,  from  Greek  to  cooking,  and  from  drawing  to  mathe¬ 
matics,  is  intellectual,  if  intellectual  at  all,  not  in  its  fixed 


BESOURCES  IN  TRAINING  THOUGHT  47 
inner  structure,  but  in  its  function  —  in  its  power  to  start 
and  direct  significant  inquiry  and  reflection.  What  geome¬ 
try  does  for  one,  the  manipulation  of  laboratory  apparatus, 
the  mastery  of  a  musical  composition,  or  the  conduct  of  a 
business  affair,  does  for  another. 


III.  Orderliness 

Reflective  Thinking  Implies  Consecutiveness,  Continuity,  or 
Ordering  of  Suggestions 

The  mere  occurrence  of  ideas  or  suggestions  constitutes 
thinking,  but  not  reflective  thinking,  not  observation  and 
thought  directed  to  an  acceptable  conclusion  —  that  is,  to  a 
conclusion  which  it  is  reasonable  to  believe  because  of  the 
grounds  on  which  it  rests  and  the  evidence  which  supports 
it.  Ideas  merely  as  such,  apart  from  their  orderly  sequence, 
just  ‘  pop  into  our  heads.’  “  I  just  happened  to  think  of 
something  ”  is  often  a  perfectly  accurate  statement.  An¬ 
other  dimension  is  needed,  accordingly,  to  transform  sug¬ 
gestions  into  reflective  thinking  —  the  property  of  order, 
of  consecutiveness.  There  is  no  thinking  without  what  is 
called  '  association  of  ideas,'  or  a  train  of  suggestions.  But 
such  a  train,  of  itself,  does  not  constitute  reflection.  Only 
when  the  succession  is  so  controlled  that  it  is  an  orderly 
sequence  leading  up  to  a  conclusion  that  contains  the  intel¬ 
lectual  force  of  the  preceding  ideas,  do  we  have  reflective 
thought.  And  by  “  intellectual  force  ”  is  signified  force  in 
making  some  idea  worthy  of  belief;  in  making  it  tritst- 
worthy. 

When  the  factors  of  facility,  of  fertility,  and  of  depth 
are  properly  balanced  or  proportioned,  we  get  as  the  out¬ 
come  continuity  of  thought.  We  desire  neither  the  slow 
mind  nor  yet  the  hasty.  We  wish  neither  random  diffuseness 


48  BOW  WK  THINK 

nor  fixed  rigidity.  Gansccutivenfai  inoiins  flexibility  and 
variety  of  materials,  conjoined  with  singlene-ss  and  definite¬ 
ness  of  direction.  It  i-s  oitposed  both  to  a  inccdiutiical  routine 
uniformity  and  to  a  gi’a.Hghojijier-iike  movement,  Of  one  kind 
of  bright  cliildrcn,  teachers  often  say  that  “  they  might  do 
anything,  if  only  they  settled  down,"  so  quick  and  apt  are 
they  in  a  variety  of  reKi)nn.sc.s.  But,  ala.s,  they  do  not  always 
settle. 

On  the  otlier  hand,  it  is  not  enough  not  to  be  diverted.  A 
deadly  and  fanatic;  con.sistency  is  not  our  goal.  Concemtra- 
tion  docs  not  mean  fixity,  or  a  cramped  arrest  or  paralysis 
of  the  flow  of  suggestion.  It  means  vnriedy  and  change  of 
ideas  combined  into  a  single  steady  trend  moving  toward  a 
unified  conclusion.  Thought  are  concentrated,  not  by  being 
kept  still  and  quiescent,  but  by  being  kept  moving  toward 
an  object,  as  a  general  marshals  his  troops  for  attack  or 
defense.  Holding  the  mind  to  a  subject  is  like  holding  a 
ship  to  its  course;  it  implies  eonstaut  change  of  position 
combined  with  unity  of  direction.  Consistent  and  orderly 
thinking  is  precisely  the  achieving  of  such  a  elmnge  within 
a  given  subject  matter.  Consistency  i.s  no  more  tlie  mere 
absence  of  contradiction  than  concentration  is  the  mere 
absence  of  diversion  —  which  exi.sts  in  dull  routine  or  in  a 
person  '  fast  asleep.’  All  kind.s  of  varied  and  incompatible 
suggestions  may  sprout  and  be  followed  in  their  growth,  and 
yet  thinking  be  consistent  and  orderly,  provided  each  one 
of  the  suggestions  is  viewed  in  relation  to  the  main  topic 
and  the  main  end  to  be  attained. 

Ordering  of  Thought  Often  the  Indirect  Concomitant  of 
Ordering  of  Action 

In  the  main,  for  most  persons,  the  primary  resource  in  the 
development  of  orderly  habits  of  thought  is  indirect,  not 
direct.  Intellectual  organization  originates  and  for  a  time 


RESOURCES  IN  TRAINING  THOUGHT  49 
grows  as  an  accompaniment  of  the  organization  of  the 
means  required  to  realize  an  end,  not  as  the  result  of  a  direct 
appeal  to  thinking  power.  The  need  of  thinking  to  accom¬ 
plish  something  beyond  thinking  is  more  potent  than  think¬ 
ing  for  its  own  sake.  All  people  at  the  outset,  and  the  major¬ 
ity  of  people  probably  all  their  lives,  attain  to  some  ordering 
of  thought  through  ordering  of  action.  Adults  normally  carry 
on  some  occupation,  profession,  pursuit;  and  this  furnishes 
the  stabilizing  axis  about  which  their  knowledge,  their  be¬ 
liefs,  and  their  habits  of  reaching  and  testing  conclusions 
are  organized.  Observations  that  have  to  do  with  the  effi¬ 
cient  performance  of  their  calling  are  extended  and  rendered 
precise.  Information  related  to  it  is  not  merely  amassed  and 
then  left  in  a  heap ;  it  is  classified  and  subdivided  so  as  to 
be  available  as  needed.  Inferences  are  made  by  most  men 
not  from  purely  speculative  motives,  but  because  they  are 
necessary  for  the  efficient  performance  of  the  duties  in¬ 
volved  in  their  several  callings.  Thus  their  inferences  are 
constantly  tested  by  results  achieved;  futile  and  scattering 
methods  tend  to  be  discounted;  orderly  arrangements  have 
a  premium  put  upon  them.  The  event,  the  issue,  stands  as 
a  constant  check  on  the  thinking  that  has  led  up  to  it;  and 
this  discipline  by  efficiency  in  action  is  the  chief  sanction, 
in  practically  all  who  are  not  scientific  specialists,  of  order¬ 
liness  of  thought  —  provided  always  that  action  remains 
intelligent  and  does  not  become  routine. 

Peculiar  Difficulty  and  Peculiar  Opportunity  with  Children 

Such  a  resource  —  the  main  prop  of  disciplined  thinking 
in  adult  life  —  is  not  to  be  despised  in  training  the  young  in 
right  intellectual  habits.  From  an  early  age,  children  have 
to  select  acts  and  objects  as  means  for  reaching  ends.  With 
selection  go  arrangement  and  adaptation.  These  operations 
demand  judgment.  Suitable  conditions  work  unconsciously 


50  HOW  WE  THINK 

to  build  up  an  attitude  favorable  to  rclk'i'tivc  operations. 
There  are,  however,  profound  differeiU’i.'U  between  the  im¬ 
mature  and  the  adult  with  roppect  to  the  cuKanized  char- 
acter  of  their  activities  — diltennices  tlmt  niUKt  be  taken 
seriously  into  account  in  any  cducntinnul  uki*  of  activities: 
(1)  the  external  acliieveinent  resulting  from  ai-tivily  k  a 
more  urgent  necessity  with  tlic  adult,  tuul  hence  is  with  him 
a  more  effective  means  of  disci|diiiing  the  mind  than  with 
the  child;  (2)  the  ends  of  adult  activity  are  more  s|)ecial- 
ized  than  those,  of  eliild  activity. 

1.  The  selection  and  arrangement  of  ajiiiroiuiate  lines 
of  action  is  a  much  more  dillicult  prolilem  with  youth  than 
it  is  in  the  case  of  adults.  With  the  latter,  the  main  lines 
are  more  or  loss  settled  by  eircum.stances.  The  soeial  status 
of  the  adult  —  the  fact  that  he  is  a  citizen,  a  hou.«elioIder, 
a  parent,  one  occupied  in  some  regular  indu.«trial  nr  profe-s- 
sional  calling — proscribes  the  chief  features  of  the  acts  to 
be  performed,  and  gecure.s,  almost  a\itriniati('ally  as  it  were, 
appropriate  and  related  niode.s  of  thinking.  But  M'ith  the 
child  there  is  no  such  fixity  of  status  and  pursuit.  There  is 
almost  nothing  to  dictate  that  .such  and  sucli  a  consecutive 
line  of  action,  rather  than  another,  .shall  he  followed;  while 
the  will  of  others,  his  own  eaiiriec,  and  eircunistances  about 
him  tend  to  produce  an  i.solated  momentary  act.  The  ab¬ 
sence  of  continued  motivation  cooperates  with  the  inner 
plasticity  of  the  immature  to  increase  the  importance  of 
educational  training  and  at  the  same  time  magnifies  the 
difficulties  in  the  way  of  finding  consecutive  modes  of  ac¬ 
tivities  that  may  do  for  child  and  youth  wdiat  serious  voca¬ 
tions  and  functions  do  for  the  adult.  In  the  case  of  children 
the  choice  is  so  peculiarly  exposed  to  arbitrary  factors,  to 
mere  school  traditions,  to  waves  of  pedagogical  fad  and 
fancy,  to  fluctuating  social  cross  currents,  that  sometimes, 
in  sheer  disgust  at  the  inadequacy  of  results,  a  reaction  oo- 


BESOUECES  IN  TEAINING  THOUGHT  SJ 
curs  in  favor  of  abandoning  altogether  the  use  of  overt 
activity  as  an  educational  factor,  and  recourse  is  had  to 
purely  theoretical  subjects  and  methods. 

2.  This  very  difficulty,  however,  points  to  the  fact  that 
the  opportunity  for  selecting  truly  educative  activities  is 
indefinitely  greater  in  child  life  than  in  adult.  The  factor  of 
external  pressure  is  so  strong  with  most  adults  that  the  edu¬ 
cative  value  of  the  pursuit  —  its  reflex  influence  upon  intel¬ 
ligence  and  character  —  however  genuine,  is  incidental,  and 
frequently  almost  accidental.  The  problem  and  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  with  the  young  is  selection  of  orderly  and  continuous 
modes  of  occupation,  which,  while  they  lead  up  to  and  pre¬ 
pare  for  the  indispensable  activities  of  adult  life,  have 
their  own  sufficient  justification  in  their  present  reflex  influ¬ 
ence  upon  the  formation  of  habits  of  thought. 

Extreme  Views  about  Overt  Activities  in  Education 

Educational  practice  shows  a  continual  tendency  to  oscil¬ 
late  between  two  extremes  with  respect  to  overt  and  ex- 
ertive  activities. 

One  extreme  is  to  neglect  them  almost  entirely,  on  the 
ground  that  they  are  chaotic  and  fluctuating,  mere  diver¬ 
sions  appealing  to  the  transitory  unformed  taste  and  ca¬ 
price  of  immature  minds;  or  if  they  avoid  this  evil,  are  ob¬ 
jectionable  copies  of  the  highly  specialized,  and  more  or  less 
commercial,  activities  of  adult  life.  If  activities  are  ad¬ 
mitted  at  all  into  the  school,  the  admission  is  a  grudging 
concession  to  the  necessity  of  having  occasional  relief  from 
the  strain  of  constant  intellectual  work  or  to  the  clamor  of 
outside  utilitarian  demands  upon  the  school. 

The  other  extreme  is  an  enthusiastic  belief  in  the  almost 
magical  educative  efficacy  of  any  kind  of  activity,  granted 
it  is  an  activity  and  not  a  passive  absorption  of  academic 
and  theoretic  material,  The  conceptions  of  play,  of  self- 


52  HOW  WE  THINK 

expression,  of  natural  growtli,  are  appealed  to  almost  as  if 
they  meant  that  almost  any  kind  of  spontaneous  activity 
inevitably  secures  the  desired  or  desirable  training  of  men¬ 
tal  power;  or  a  mythological  brain  physiologi'  is  appealed 
to  as  proof  that  any  exercise  of  the  muscles  trains  power 
of  thought. 

The  Real  Problem;  Diacovering  the  Valuable  Occupations 

While  we  vibrate  from  one  of  these  extremes  to  the  other, 
the  moat  serious  of  all  problems  is  ignored;  the  problem, 
namely,  of  discovering  and  arranging  the  occupations  (a) 
that  are  most  congenial,  best  adapted,  to  the  immature  stage 
of  development;  (b)  that  have  the  most  ulterior  promise  as 
preparation  for  the  social  responsibilitie.s  of  adult  life;  and 
(c)  that,  at  the  same  time,  have  the  maximum  of  influence 
in  forming  habits  of  acute  observation  and  of  con.secutive 
inference.  As  curiosity  is  related  to  the  acqui.sition  of  mate¬ 
rial  of  thought,  as  suggestion  is  related  to  flexibility  and 
force  of  thought,  so  the  ordering  of  activities,  not  themselves 
primarily  intellectual,  is  related  to  the  forming  of  intellec¬ 
tual  powers  of  consecutiveness. 


IV.  Some  Education/vl  Conclusions 

The  wisest  of  the  Greeks  said  that  wonder  was  the  author 
of  science  and  philosophy.  Wonder  is  not  identical  with 
curiosity;  it  is,  however,  the  same  as  curiosity  when  the 
latter  reaches  the  intellectual  plane.  External  monotony  and 
internal  routine  are  the  worst  enemies  of  wonder.  Surprise, 
the  unexpected,  novelty,  stimulate  it.  Everyone  knows  that 
a  moving  object  catches  and  holds  the  eye  more  readily  than 
one  at  rest,  and  the  more  mobile  parts  of  the  body  have  the 
greater  capacity  for  making  tactile  discriminations  than 


EESOURCES  IN  TRAINING  THOUGHT  53 
those  that  are  more  fixed.  Yet  under  the  name  of  discipline 
and  good  order,  school  conditions  are  often  made  to  ap¬ 
proximate  as  nearly  as  possible  to  monotony  and  uniform¬ 
ity.  Desks  and  chairs  are  in  set  positions;  pupils  are  regi¬ 
mented  with,  military  precision.  The  same  textbook  is 
thumbed  for  a  long  period  to  the  exclusion  of  other  reading. 
All  topics  are  barred  from  the  recitation  except  those  taken 
up  in  the  text ;  ‘  system  ’  in  the  conduct  of  the  recitation  is 
so  emphasized  that  spontaneity  is  excluded  and  likewise 
novelty  and  variety.  These  instances  may  seem  exaggerated 
with  respect  to  the  administration  of  the  better  schools.  But 
in  schools  where  the  chief  aim  is  to  establish  mechanical 
habit  and  instill  uniformity  of  conduct,  the  conditions  that 
stimulate  wonder  and  keep  it  energetic  and  vital  are  neces¬ 
sarily  ruled  out. 

Unfortunately,  reaction  against  this  mechanical  admin¬ 
istration  of  education  is  often  merely  a  reaction.  Novelty  is 
treated  as  if  it  were  an  end  in  itself,  when  in  fact  it  is 
simply  a  stimulating  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  observa¬ 
tion  and  inquiry.  Variety  is  carried  to  the  point  where  it  is 
incompatible  with  that  continuity  that  is  essential  for  good 
thinking.  Because  order  has  been  associated  with  external 
uniformity,  the  kind  of  order  that  promotes  effective  intel¬ 
lectual  action  is  also  slighted.  Again,  most  enterprises  in 
school  are  of  too  short  a  span  to  allow  for  that  unfolding 
and  leading  of  one  thing  into  another  without  which  good 
habits  of  reflection  cannot  be  developed.  In  the  desire  for 
accuracy  in  remembering  details,  large  and  comprehensive 
views  are  shut  out.  The  acquisition  of  information  is 
identified  with  the  amassing  of  isolated  items,  and  not  with 
assimilating  mental  food  that  is  to  be  organized  into 
thought  if  it  is  to  have  any  value.  It  is  an  old  saying  that 
unity  in  variety  marks  every  work  of  genuine  art.  Cer¬ 
tainly  the  art  of  teaching  bears  out  the  saying.  If  one  re- 


54  HOW  WK  THINK 

calls  Ilia  contacts  with  teachers  who  loft  a  permanent  Intel- 
lectual  impress,  one  will  find  that,  although  they  may  have 
violated  in  their  teaching  many  of  the  set  rules  of  pedagogy, 
they  were  persons  who  could  maintain  eontinuity  of  thought 
and  effort  even  when  admitting  what  seemed  to  he  diver¬ 
sions  and  forays  into  side  fields;  that  they  were  persons  who 
introduced  novelty  and  variety  to  keep  attention  filert  and 
taut,  but  who  also  utilized  these  factors  to  contribute  to 
the  building  up  of  the  main  problem  and  the  enrichment  of 
the  main  theme. 


CHAPTER  FOUR 


SCHOOL  CONDITIONS  AND  THE 
TRAINING  OF  THOUGHT 


I.  Inthodtjctory;  Methods  and  Conditions 
Formal  Discipline  versus  Real  Thinking 

The  so-called  '  faculty  psychology  ’  went  hand  in  hand 
with  the  vogue  of  the  formal-discipline  idea  in  education. 
If  thought  is  a  distinct  piece  of  mental  machinery,  separate 
from  observation,  memory,  imagination,  and  common-sense 
judgments  of  persons  and  things,  then  thought  should  be 
trained  by  special  exercises  designed  for  the  purpose,  as  one 
might  devise  special  exercises  for  developing  the  biceps 
muscles.  Certain  subjects  are  then  to  be  regarded  as  intel¬ 
lectual  or  logical  subjects  par  excellence,  possessed  of  a  pre¬ 
destined  fitness  to  exercise  the  thought  faculty,  just  as  cer¬ 
tain  machines  are  better  than  others  for  developing  arm 
power.  With  these  three  notions  goes  the  fourth,  that 
method  consists  of  a  set  of  operations  by  which  the  ma¬ 
chinery  of  thought  is  set  going  and  kept  at  work  upon  any 
subject  matter. 

We  have  tried  to  make  it  clear  in  the  previous  chapters 
that  there  is  no  single  and  uniform  power  of  thought,  but 
'a  multitude  of  different  ways  in  which  specific  things  — 
things  observed,  remembered,  heard  of,  read  about  —  evoke 
suggestions  or  ideas  that  are  pertinent  to  a  problem  or 
question  and  that  carry  the  mind  forward  to  a  justifiable 
conclusion.  Training  is  that  development  of  curiosity,  sug¬ 
gestion,  and  habits  of  exploring  and  testing,  which  increases 


56  HOW  WE  THINK 

sensitiveness  to  questions  and  love  of  inquiry  into  the  puz¬ 
zling  and  unknown;  which  enhances  the  fitness  of  sug- 
lestions  that  spring  up  in  the  mind,  and  controls  their 
succession  in  a  developing  and  cumulative  order;  which 
makes  more  acute  the  sense  of  the  force,  the  proving  power, 
of  every  fact  observed  and  suggestion  employed.  Thinking 
is  not  a  separate  mental  process;  it  is  an  affair  of  the  way  in 
which  the  vast  multitude  of  objects  that  are  observed  and 
suggested  are  employed,  the  way  they  run  together  and  are 
made  to  run  together,  the  way  they  are  handled.  Conse¬ 
quently  any  subject,  topic,  question,  is  intellectual  not 
per  se  but  because  of  the  part  it  is  made  to  play  in  direct¬ 
ing  thought  in  the  life  of  any  particular  person. 

The  Training  of  Thought  Is  Indirect 

For  these  reasons,  the  problem  of  method  in  forming 
habits  of  reflective  thought  is  the  problem  of  establishing 
conditions  that  will  arouse  and  guide  curiosity;  of  setting 
up  the  connections  in  things  experienced  that  will  on  later 
occasions  promote  the  flow  of  suggestions,  create  problems 
and  purposes  that  will  favor  consecutiveness  in  the  succes¬ 
sion  of  ideas.  These  topics  will  be  considered  more  at 
length  later,  but  an  illustration  or  two  drawn  from  failure 
to  secure  proper  conditions  will  indicate  more  clearly  what 
is  meant.  Children  are  hushed  up  when  they  ask  questions; 
their  exploring  and  investigating  activities  are  inconvenient 
and  hence  they  are  treated  like  nuisances ;  pupils  are  taught 
to  memorize  things  so  that  merely  one-track  verbal  associa¬ 
tions  are  set  up  instead  of  varied  and  flexible  connections 
with  things  themselves;  no  plans  and  projects  are  provided 
that  compel  the  student  to  look  ahead  and  foresee  and  in 
the  execution  of  which  the  accomplishment  of  one  thing 
sets  up  new  questions  and  suggests  new  undertakings.  The 
teacher  may  devise  special  exercises  intended  to  train  think- 


THE  SCHOOL  AND  TRAINING  THOUGHT  57 
ing  directly,  but  when  these  wrong  conditions  exist,  spe¬ 
cial  exercises  are  doomed  to  be  futile.  The  training  of 
thought  can  be  attained  only  by  regulating  the  causes  that 
evoke  and  guide  it. 

With  respect  to  the  training  of  habits  of  thought,  the 
teacher’s  problem  is  thus  twofold.  On  the  one  side,  he  needs 
(as  we  saw  in  the  last  chapter)  to  be  a  student  of  individual 
traits  and  habits ;  on  the  other  side,  he  needs  to  be  a  stu¬ 
dent  of  the  conditions  that  modify  for  better  or  worse  the 
directions  in  which  individual  powers  habitually  express 
themselves.  He  needs  to  recognize  that  method  covers  not 
only  what  he  intentionally  devises  and  employs  for  the 
purpose  of  mental  training,  but  also  what  he  does  without 
any  conscious  reference  to  it  —  anything  in  the  atmosphere 
and  conduct  of  the  school  that  reacts  in  any  way  upon  the 
curiosity,  the  responsiveness,  and  the  orderly  activity  of 
children.  The  teacher  who  is  an  intelligent  student  both  of 
individual  mental  operations  and  of  the  effects  of  school 
conditions  upon  those  operations  can  largely  be  trusted  to 
select  for  himself  methods  of  instruction  in  their  nar¬ 
rower  and  more  technical  sense  —  those  best  adapted  to 
achieve  results  in  particular  subjects,  such  as  reading, 
geography,  or  algebra.  In  the  hands  of  one  who  is  not  intel¬ 
ligently  aware  of  individual  capacities  and  of  the  influence 
unconsciously  exerted  upon  them  by  the  entire  environment, 
even  the  best  of  technical  methods  are  likely  to  get  an 
immediate  result  at  the  expense  of  forming  deep-seated  and 
persistent  bad  habits. 

Generic  and  Specific  Conditions 

There  is  always  a  temptation  for  the  teacher  to  keep  at¬ 
tention  fixed  upon  a  limited  field  of  the  pupil’s  activity.  Is 
jjthe  student  progressing  in  the  particular  topic  in  aiutEmetic, 
history,  geography,  etc.,  that  is  under  consideration?  When 


58  HOW  WE  THINK 

the  teacher  fixes  his  attention  exclusively  on  such  matters 
as  these,  the  process  of  forming  underlying  and  permane'ni/ 
habits,  attitudes,  and  interests  is  overlooked.  Yet  the  for-] 
matron  of  the  latter  is  the  more  important  for  the  future. 
The  other  aide  of  this  fact  is  that  the  teacher,  while  fixing 
attention  upon  the  specific  conditions  that  seem  to  affect 
learning  of  the  immediate  lesson  before  the  class,  ignores 
the  more  general  conditions  that  influence  the  creation  of 
permanent  attitudes,  especially  the  traits  of  character, 
open-mindedness,  whole-heartedncss,  and  responsibility, 
mentioned  in  an  earlier  chapter.  Postponing  consideration 
of  special  points,  we  shall,  accordingly,  in  the  present  chap¬ 
ter  take  up  some  of  the  more  generic  conditions  of  the 
schoolroom  that  affect  the  development  of  effective  mental 
habits, 


II.  The  Influence  of  the  Habits  of  Othbhs 

Bare  reference  to  the  imitativeness  of  human  nature  is 
enough  to  suggest  how  profoundly  the  mental  habits  of 
others  affect  the  attitude  of  tlic  one  being  trained.  Example 
is  more  potent  than  precept,  and  a  teacher’s  best  conscious 
efforts  may  be  more  than  counteracted  by  the  influence  of 
personal  traits  that  he  is  unaware  of  or  that  he  regards  as 
unimportant.  Methods  of  instruction  and  discipline  that  are 
technically  faulty  may  be  rendered  practically  innocuous 
by  the  inspiration  of  the  personal  method  that  lies  back  of 
them. 

The  Teacher  a  Stimulus  to  Response  in  Intellectual  Matters 

To  confine,  however,  the  conditioning  influence  of  the 
educator,  whether  parent  or  teacher,  to  imitation  is  to  get" 
a  very  superficial  view  of  the  intellectual  influence  of  others. 


THE  SCHOOL  AND  TRAINING  THOUGHT  59 

Imitation  is  but  one  case  of  a  deeper  principle  —  that  of 
stimulus  and  response.  Everything  the  teacher  does,  as  well' 
'as  the  manner  in  which  he  does  it,  incites  the  child  to  re¬ 
spond  in  some  way  or  other,  and  each  response  tends  to  set 
the  child’s  attitude  in  some  way  or  other.  Even  the  inatten-* 
tion  of  the  child  to  the  adult  is  often  a  response  that  is  the 
result  of  unconscious  training.'^  The  teacher  is  rarely  (and 
even  then  never  entirely)  a  transparent  medium  of  the  ac¬ 
cess  of  another  mind  to  a  subject.  With  the  young,  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  the  teacher’s  personality  is  intimately  fused  with 
that  of  the  subject;  the  child  does  not  separate  or  even 
distinguish  the  two.  And  as  the  child’s  response  is  toward 
or  away  from  anything  presented,  he  keeps  up  a  running 
commentary,  of  which  he  himself  is  hardly  distinctly  aware, 
of  like  and  dislike,  of  sympathy  and  aversion,  not  merely 
upon  the  acts  of  the  teacher,  but  also  upon  the  subject  with 
which  the  teacher  is  occupied. 

The  extent  and  power  of  this  influence  upon  morals  and 
manners,  upon  character,  upon  habits  of  speech  and  social 
bearing,  are  almost  universally  recognized.  But  the  tend¬ 
ency  to  conceive  of  thought  as  an  isolated  faculty  often 
blinds  teachers  to  the  fact  that  this  influence  is  just  as 
real  and  pervasive  in  intellectual  concerns.  Teachers,  as, 
well  as  children,  stick  more  or  less  to  the  main  points,  have 
more  or  leas  wooden  and  rigid  methods  of  response,  and 
display  more  or  less  intellectual  curiosity  about  matters 
that  come  up,  And  every  trait  of  this  kind  is  an  inevitable 
part  of  the  teacher’s  method  of  teaching.  Merely  to  acchpt 
without  notice  slipshod  habits  of  speech,  slovenly  inferences, 
unimaginative  and  literal  response,  is  to  indorse  these  tend- 

A  child  of  four  or  five  who  had  been  repeatedly  called  to  the 
house  by  his  mother  with  no  apparent  responae  on  hia  own  part,  waa 
aaked  if  he  did  not  hear  her.  He  replied  quite  judicially,  “  Oh,  yes, 
but  she  doean’t  call  very  mad  yet." 


62  HOW  WE  THINK 

marked  —  ‘  disciplinary  ’  studies,  such  as  arithmetic  and 
formal  grammar,”  Each  of  these  groups  of  subjects  has  its 
own  special  pitfalls. 

Disciplinary  Studies  Liable  to  Lose  Contact  with  the  Practical 

In  the  case  of  the  so-called  disciplinary  or  preeminently 
logical  studies,  there  is  clanger  of  the  isolation  of  intellec¬ 
tual  activity  from  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life.  Teacher  and 
student  alike  tend  to  set  up  a  chasm  between  logical  thought, 
as  something  abstract  and  remote,  and  the  specific  and  con¬ 
crete  demands  of  evei'yday  events.  The  abstract  tends  to 
become  so  aloof,  so  far  away  from  aiiplication,  as  to  be  cut 
loose  from  practical  and  moral  bearing.  The  gullibility  of 
specialized  scholars  when  out  of  their  own  lines,  their  ex¬ 
travagant  habits  of  inference  and  speech,  their  ineptness  in 
reaching  conclusions  in  practical  matters,  their  egotistical 
engrossment  in  their  own  subjects,  are  extreme  examples 
of  the  bad  effects  of  severing  studies  completely  from  their 
ordinary  connections  in  life. 

Skill  Studies  Liable  to  Become  Purely  Mechanical 

The  danger  in  those  studies  where  the  main  emphasis  is 
upon  acquisition  of  skill  is  just  the  reverse.  The  tendency 
is  to  take  the  shortest  cuts" possible  to  gain  the  required 
end.  This  makes  the  subjects  machanical,  and  thus  restric- 
tiTC  of  intellectual  nower.  In  the  mastery  of  reading,  writ¬ 
ing,  drawing,  laboratory  technique,  etc.,  the  need  for  econ¬ 
omy  of  time  and  material,  of  neatness  and  accuracy,  for 
promptness  and  uniformity,  is  so  great  that  these  things 
tend  to  become  ends  in  themselves,  irrespective  of  their  in- 

®  Of  course,  any  one  subject  has  all  three  aspects;  e.g.,  in  arith¬ 
metic,  counting,  reading  and  writing  numbers,  rapid  adding,  etc.,  are 
cases  of  skill  in  doing;  the  tables  of  weights  and  measures  are  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  information,  etc. 


the  school  and  training  thought  63 

,fluence  upon  general  mental  attitude.  Sheer  imitation,  dic- 
Itation  of  steps  to  be  taken,  mechanical  drill,  may  give  re- 
i  suits  most  quickly  and  yet  strengthen  traits  likely  to  be 
•fatal  to  reflective  power.  The  pupil  is  enjoined  to  do  this 
and  that  specific  thing,  with  no  knowledge  of  any  reason 
except  that  by  so  doing  he  gets  his  result  most  speedily; 
his  mistakes  are  pointed  out  and  corrected  for  him;  he  is 
kept  at  pure  repetition  of  certain  acts  till  they  become 
automatic.  Later,  teachers  wonder  why  the  pupil  reads  with 
so  little  expression,  and  figures  with  so  little  intelligent  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  terms  of  his  problem.  In  some  educational 
dogmas  and  practiees,  the  very  idea  of  training  the  mind 
seems  to  be  hopelessly  confused  with  that  of  a  drill  which 
hardly  touches  mind  at  all  —  or  touches  it  for  the  worse  — 
since  it  is  wholly  taken  up  with  training  skill  in  external 
execution,  This  method  reduces  the  '  training  ’  of  human  be¬ 
ings  to  the  level  of  animal  training.  Practical  skill,  modes  of 
effective  technique,  can  be  intelligently,  non-mechanically 
used  only  when  intelligence  has  played  a  part  in  their 
acquisition. 

Informational  Studies  May  Fail  to  Develop  Wisdom 

A  false  opposition  is  often  set  up  also,  especially  in  higher 
education,  between  information  and  understanding.  One 
party  insists  that  the  acquisition  of  scholarship  must  come 
first,  since  intelligence  can  operate  only  on  the  basis  of  ac¬ 
tual  subject  matter  that  is  under  control.  The  other  party 
holds  that  scholarship  for  and  by  itself  is  at  best  an  end 
only  for  the  speeialist,  the  graduate  student,  etc.,  and  that 
the  development  of  power  to  think  is  the  chief  thing.  The 
real  desideratum  is  getting  command  of  scholarship  —  or 
skill  —  under  conditions  that  at  the  same  time  exercise 
thought.  The  distinction  between  information  and  wisdom 
is  old,  and  yet  requires  constantly  to  be  redrawn.  Informa- 


64  HOW  WE  THINK 

tioD  is  knowledge  that.Ja.iiicrcly,acquircci  and  stored  up; 
■wisdom  ip.know^edgG  pperu'tingjn  jyic  direction  of  powers  -te 
the  better  living  of  life.  Inforinatign,, merely  asjnfonnation, 
implies  no  special  trainingpf, intellectuaLcapacity ;  wisdopi 
is  the  finest  fruit  of  that  training.  In  school,  amassing  in¬ 
formation  always  tends  to  escape  from  the  ideal  of  wisdom 
or  good  judgment.  The  aim  often  seems  to  be  —  especially 
in  such  a  subject  as  geography  —  to  make  the  pupil'what 
has  been  called  a  '  cyclopedia  of  useless  information.’ '  Cov¬ 
ering  the  ground  ’  is~the  primary  necessity;  the  nurture  of 
mind  a  bad  second.  Thinking  cannot,  of  course,’  go  on  in  a 
vacuum;  suggestions  and  inferences  can  occur  only  to  a 
mind  that  possesses  information  as  to  matters  of  fact. 

But  there  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world  whether  the 
acquisition  of  information  is  treated  as  an  end  in  itself,  or 
is  made  an  integral  portion  of  the  training  of  thought,  The 
assumption  that  information  that  has  been  accumulated 
apart  from  use  in  the  recognition  and  solution  of  a  problem 
may  later  on  be,  at  will,  freely  employed  by  thought  is  quite 
false.  The  skill  at  the  ready  command  of  intelligence  is  the 
skill  acquired  with  the  aid  of  intelligence;  the  only  infor¬ 
mation  which,  otherwise  than  by  accident,  can  be  put  to 
logical  use  is  that  acquired  in  the  course  of  thinking,  Be¬ 
cause  their  knowledge  has  been  achieved  in  connection  with 
the  needs  of  specific  situations,  men  of  little  book-learning 
are  often  able  to  put  to  effective  use  every  ounce  of  knowl¬ 
edge  they  possess;  while  men  of  vast  erudition  are  often 
swamped  by  the  mere  bulk  of  their  learning,  because  mem¬ 
ory,  rather  than  thinking,  has  been  operative  in  obtaining  it. 


IV.  The  Influence  op  Cueeent  Aims  and  Ideals 

It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  separate  this  somewhat  in¬ 
tangible  condition  from  the  points  just  dealt  with ;  for  auto- 


the  aCHOOL  AND  TRAINING  THOUGHT  65 

matic  skill  and  quantity  of  information  are  educational 
ideals  that  pervade  the  whole  school.  We  may  distinguish, 
however,  certain  tendencies,  such  as  that  of  judging  educa¬ 
tion  from  the  standpoint  of  external  results,  instead  of  from 
that  of  the  development  of  personal  attitudes  and  habits. 
The  ideal  of  the  product,  as  against  that  of  the  mental  proc¬ 
ess  by  which  the  product  is  attained,  shows  itself  both  in 
instruction  and  in  moral  discipline. 

The  Exaltation  of  External  Standards 

a.  In  Instruction.  In  instruction,  the  external  standard 
manifests  itself  in  the  importance  attached  to  the  ‘  correct 
answer.’  No  one  other  thing,  probably,  works  so  fatally 
against  focussing  the  attention  of  teachers  upon  the  train¬ 
ing  of  mind  as  the  domination  of  their  minds  by  the  idea 
that  the  chief  thing  is  to  get  pupils  to  recite  their  lessons 
correctly.  As  long  as  this  end  is  uppermost  (whether  con¬ 
sciously  or  unconsciously) ,  training  of  mind  remains  an  in¬ 
cidental  and  secondary  consideration.  There  is  no  great  dif¬ 
ficulty  in  understanding  why  this  ideal  has  such  vogue.  The 
large  number  of  pupils  to  be  dealt  with  and  the  tendency  of 
parents  and  school  authorities  to  demand  speedy  and  tan¬ 
gible  evidence  of  progress  conspire  to  give  it  authority. 
Knowledge  of  subject  matter  —  not  of  children  —  is  alone 
exacted  of  teachers  by  this  aim;  and  moreover,  knowledge 
of  subj  ect  matter  only  in  portions  definitely  prescribed  and 
laid  out,  and  hence  mastered  with  comparative  ease,  Edu¬ 
cation  that  takes  as  its  standard  the  improvement  of  the 
intellectual  attitude  and  method  of  students  demands  more 
serious  preparatory  training,  for  it  exacts  sympathetic  and 
intelligent  insight  into  the  workings  of  individual  minds  and 
a  very  wide  and  flexible  command  of  subj  ect  matter  —  so 
as  to  be  able  to  select  and  apply  just  what  is  needed  when 
it  is  needed,  Finally,  the  securing  of  external  results  is  an 


66  HOW  WE  THINK 

aim  that  lends  itself  naturally  to  the  mechanics  of  school 
administration  —  to  examinations,  marks,  gradings,  promo¬ 
tions,  and  so  on. 

b.  In  Behavior.  With  reference  to  behavior  also,  the 
external  ideal  has  a  great  influence.  Conformity  of  acts  to 
precepts  and  rules  is  the  easiest,  because  most  mechanical, 
standard  to  employ.  It  is  no  part  of  our  pre.sent  task  to  tell 
just  how  far  dogmatic  instruction,  or  .strict  adherence  to 
custom,  convention,  and  the  commands  of  a  social  superior, 
should  extend  in  moral  training;  but  since  problems  of  con¬ 
duct  are  the  deepest  and  most  common  of  all  the  problems 
of  life,  the  ways  in  which  they  are  met  have  an  influence 
that  radiates  into  every  other  mental  attitude,  even  those 
far  remote  from  any  direct  or  conscious  moral  considera¬ 
tion.  Indeed,  the  deepest  plane  of  the  mental  attitude  of 
everyone  is  fixed  by  the  way  in  which  problems  of  behavior 
are  treated.  If  the  function  of  thought,  of  serious  inquiry  and 
reflection,  is  reduced  to  a  minimum  in  dealing  with  them,  it 
is  not  reasonable  to  expect  habits  of  thought  to  exercise 
great  influence  in  less  important  matters.  On  the  other  hand, 
habits  of  active  inquiry  and  careful  deliberation  in  the  sig¬ 
nificant  and  vital  problems  of  conduct  afford  the  best  guar¬ 
antee  that  the  general  structure  of  mind  will  be  reasonable. 

la  There  Transfer  of  Training  in  Thinking? 

The  point  just  made  leads  to  the  question  that  is  some¬ 
times  raised  as  to  whether  the  rejection  of  the  idea  of  spe¬ 
cial  faculties  that  can  be  trained  by  formal  exercises  does 
not  demand  the  rejection  also  of  the  possibility  of  training 
thought.  The  question  has  been  partly  answered  in  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  nature  of  thinking  that  has  been  set  forth 
(that  it  is  not  a  ‘  faculty,’  but  an  organization  of  materials 
and  activities)  and  its  relation  to  objective  conditions.  But 
there  is  another  aspect  of  the  question  that  is  suggested  by 


the  school  and  training  thought  67 

the  term  ‘  transfer.’  The  question  is  asked  whether  the  abil¬ 
ity  to  think  gained  in  dealing  with  one  situation  or  subject 
will  prove  itself  equally  efficient  in  dealing  with  another 
subject  and  situation;  that  it  does  not  do  so  necessarily  is 
indicated  by  the  fact  that  a  scientific  specialist  may  be  a 
child  in  practical  affairs  of  business;  that  he  may  violate 
in  matters  of  politics  or  religious  belief  every  principle  that 
he  scrupulously  observes  in  his  special  field  of  inquiry.  It  is 
now  generally  recognized  that  common  elements  are  the 
basis  of  so-called  ‘  transfer.’  That  is,  the  carrying  over  of 
skill  and  understanding  from  one  experience  to  another  is 
dependent  upon  the  existence  of  like  elements  in  both  ex¬ 
periences.  The  simplest  sort  of  example  is  found  in  the 
extended  application  given  by  children  to  ideas  and  words. 
A  young  child  whose  acquaintance  with  quadrupeds  is  lim¬ 
ited  to  a  dog  will  tend  to  call  any  four-footed  animal  of  a 
similar  size  “  doggie.”  Similar  qualities  are  always  the 
bridge  over  which  the  mind  passes  in  going  from  a  former 
experience  to  a  new  one.  Now  thinking,  as  we  shall  see  later 
in  detail,  is  a  process  of  grasping  in  a  conscious  way  the 
common  elements.  It  thus  adds  greatly  to  the  availability 
of  common  elements  for  purposes  of  transfer.  Unless  these 
elements  are  seized  and  held  by  the  mind  (as  they  are  in  a 
.  rudimentary  way  by  the  symbol  '  dog  ’) ,  any  transfer  oc¬ 
curs  only  blindly,  by  sheer  accident.  The  first  answer  to 
the  objection  that  the  building  up  of  a  general  habit  of 
thinking  is  impossible  is,  therefore,  that  thinking  is  pre¬ 
cisely  the  factor  that  makes  transfer  possible  and  that 
brings  it  under  control. 

The  more  technical  a  subject,  the  fewer  common  elements 
it  provides  for  thinking  to  work  with.  In  fact,  we  might  al¬ 
most  set  up  this  test  for  the  technical  nature  of  any  subject, 
theme,  or  undertaking;  in  what  degree  is  it  isolated  from 
the  material  of  everyday  experiences  because  of  absence  of 


6S  HOW  WE  THINK 

elementa  coramou  to  both?  To  the  person  just  beginning 
algebra  and  physics,  the  ideas  of  '  exponent '  and  ‘  atom  ’ 
are  technical ;  they  stand  alone.  He  is  not  aware  of  these 
meanings  in  connection  with  the  objects  and  acts  of  his 
ordinary  experience;  they  do  not  seem  to  be  contained  in 
even  the  materials  of  his  school  experience.  To  the  mature 
scientist,  on  the  contrary,  the  ideas  are  much  lcs.s  technical 
because  they  enter  into  so  many  experiences  that  have  be¬ 
come  familiar  to  him  ns  a  scientific  inquirer.  During  the 
early  stage.s  of  c-xperience  and  for  the  greater  part  of  all  ex¬ 
perience,  save  that  of  specialists,  the  common  elements  are 
the  human  elements,  those  connected  with  the  relations  of 
persons  to  one  another  and  to  groups,  The  most  imiiortant 
things  to  a  child  are  hia  connections  with  father  and  mother, 
brother  and  sister,  Elements  connected  with  them  recur  in 
most  of  the  experiences  he  has.  They  saturate  the  greater 
number  of  his  experiences  and  supply  them  with  their  mean¬ 
ing.  These  human  and  social  factors  are  accordingly  those 
that  carry  over  and  can  be  carried  over  ino,st  readily  from 
one  experience  to  another.  They  furnish  tlic  material  best 
suited  for  developing  generalized  abilities  of  thinking,  One 
reason  why  much  of  elementary  schooling  is  so  U3ele,3S  for 
the  development  of  reflective  attitudes  is  that,  on  entering 
school  life,  a  break  is  suddenly  made  in  the  life  of  the  child, 
a  break  with  those  of  hia  experiences  that  arc  saturated  with 
social  values  and  qualities.  Schooling  is  then  technical  be¬ 
cause  of  its  isolation,  and  the  child’s  thinking  cannot  operate 
because  school  has  nothing  in  common  with  his  earlier  ex¬ 
periences. 


PART  TWO 

LOGICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 


CHAPTEE  FIVE 


THE  PROCESS  AND  PRODUCT  OF 
REFLECTIVE  ACTIVITY:  PSY¬ 
CHOLOGICAL  PROCESS  AND 
LOGICAL  FORM 


I.  Thinking  as  a  Formal  and  as  an  Actual 
Occurrence 

The  Logic  of  the  Textbooks 

When  you  look  into  a  treatise  on  Logic,  you  find  in  it  a  i 
classification  of  terms,  such  as  particular,  general,  denota-  j 
tive,  connotative,  etc. ;  of  propositions,  such  as  positive, ' 
negative,  universal,  particular;  and  of  arguments  in  the 
form  of  syllogisms.  A  familiar  example  of  the  latter  is:  All 
men  are  mortal;  Socrates  is  a  man;  therefore,  Socrates  is 
mortal,  it  i.s  characteristic  of  a  formal  statement  that  par¬ 
ticular  specific  objects  may  be  eliminated  and  a  blank  sub¬ 
stituted  -which  may  be  filled  in  with  any  material.  The  form 
of  the  syllogism  just  cited  is:  All  M  (human  beings  in  this 
case)  is  P;  all  8  is  M;  therefore,  all  S  is  P.  In  this  formula¬ 
tion  S  stands  for  the  subject  of  the  conclusion,  P  for  its 
predicate,  and  M  for  the  middle  term.  The  middle  term  ap¬ 
pears  in  both  premises  and  is  the  connecting  link  by  which 
S  and  P,  otherwise  logically  disconnected,  are  locked  into 
unity.  It  is  the  ground  and  justification  of  the  assertion  at 
the  close  that  8  is  P.  In  invalid  reasonings  the  middle  term 
fails  to  bind  together  tightly  and  exclusively  the  subject 
and  predicate  of  the  conclusion.  It  is  possible  to  state  a 


72  HOW  WE  THINK 

number  of  rules  setting  forth  the  forms  in  which  syllogisms, 
positive  and  negative,  are  valid,  and  ruling  out  incorrect 
forms. 

How  Actual  Thinking  Differs  from  Formal  Logic 

Inspection  shows  important  differences  between  formal 
reasoning  and  thinking  as  it  actually  goes  on  in  the  mind 
I  of  any  person.  (1)  The  subject  matter  of  formal  logic  is 
I  strictly  impersonal,  as  much  so  as  the  formula;  of  algebra. 

I  The  forms  are  thus  independent  of  the  attitude  taken  by 
jthe  thinker,  of  his  desire  and  intention.  Thought  carried  on 
by  anyone  depends,  on  the  other  hand,  as  we  have  already 
seen,  upon  his  habits.  It  is  likely  to  be  good  when  he  has 
attitudes  of  carefulness,  thoroughness,  etc.,  and  bad  in  the 
degree  in  which  he  is  headlong,  unobservant,  lazy,  moved 
by  strong  passion,  tending  to  favor  himself,  etc.  (2)  The 
forms  of  logic  are  constant,  unchanging,  indifferent  to  the 
subject  matter  with  which  they  are  filled,  They  exclude 
change  as  much  as  does  the  fact  that  2  plus  2  equals  4.  A,c- 
tual  thinking  is  a  process;  it  occurs,  goes  on;  in  short,  it  is 
in  continual  change  as  long  as  a  person  thinks.  It  has  at 
j  every  step  to  take  account  of  subject  matter;  for  parts  of: 
the  material  dealt  with  offer  obstacles,  pose  problems  and  ^ 
perplexities,  while  other  portions  indicate  solutions  and 
make  the  road  out  of  intellectual  difficulties.  (3)  Because 
forms  are  uniform  and  hospitable  to  any  subject  matter 
whatever,  they  pay  no  attention  to  context.  Actual  thinking, 
on  the  other  hand,  always  has  reference  to  some  context, 
It  occurs,  as  we  have  seen,  because  of  some  unsettled  situa¬ 
tion  that  itself  lies  outside  of  thinking.  We  may  compare 
the  formal  syllogism  about  Socrates  with  the  state  of  mind 
of  his  disciples  when  they  were  considering  at  the  time  of 
his  trial  the  prospects  of  Socrates’  continuing  to  live. 


PROCESS  AND  PRODUCT 


73 


Thought  as  Logical  Form,  or  Product,  and  as  Psychological 

Process 

It  follows  from  these  contrasts  that  thought  is  looked  at 
from  two  different  points  of  view.  These  two  points  of  view 
are  indicated  in  the  title  of  this  chapter.  We  call  them 
product  and  process;  logical  form  and  existent,  or  psycho-; 
logical,  process.  They  may  also  be  termed  the  historical,  or 
chronological,  and  the  timeless.  Forms  are  constant;  think-lj 
ing  takes  time.  It  is  evident  that  education  is  primarily  con-  ii 
cerned  with  thinking  as  it  actually  takes  place  in  individual  ;j 
human  beings.  It  is  concerned  to  create  attitudes  favorable  ' 
to  effective  thought,  and  it  has  to  select  and  arrange  sub¬ 
ject  matter  and  the  activities  dealing  with  subject  matter 
so  as  to  promote  these  attitudes. 

It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  formal  treatment  lacks 
all  value  for  education.  It  has  value,  provided  it  is  put  and 
kept  in  its  place.  That  place  is  suggested  by  giving  it  the 
name  ‘  product.’  It  sets  forth  forms  into  which  the  result  of 
actual  thinking  is  thrown  in  order  to  help  test  its  worth. 
Consider,  as  an  analogy,  the  relation  that  a  map  sustains 
to  the  explorations  and  surveys  of  which  it  is  the  outcome. 
The  latter  correspond  to  processes.  The  map  is  the  product.^, 
Ajter  it  is  constructed,  it  can  be  used  without  any  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  journeys  and  expeditions  of  which  it  is  the  fruit, 
although  it  would  not  exist  if  it  had  not  been  for  them. 
When  you  look  at  a  map  of  the  United  States,  you  do  not 
have,  in  order  to  use  it,  to  think  of  Columbus,  Champlain, 
Lewis  and  Clark,  and  the  thousands  of  others  whose  trials 
and  labors  are  embodied  in  it. 

Now  the  map  is  all  there  before  you  at  once.  It  may  with 
propriety  be  called  the  form  of  all  the  special  journeyings 
from  place  to  place  that  can  be  undertaken  by  any  number 
of  persona.  Moreover,  when  a  person  is  traveling,  it  serves. 


HOW  WE  THINK 


74 

if  he  knows  how  to  use  it,  as  n  check  on  his  position  and  a 
guide  to  his  movements.  But  it  docs  not  tell  him  where  to 
/  go;  his  own  desires  and  plans  determine  his  goal,  as  his  own 
•  J  past  determines  where  he  is  now  and  where  he  must  start 
from. 

Logical  Forms  Not  Used  in  Actual  Thinking,  But  to  Set 
Forth  Results  of  Thinking 

Logical  forma  .such  as  one  find.a  in  a  logical  treatise  do  not 
pretend  to  tell  how  we  think  or  even  how  we  should  think, 
No  one  ever  ari'ivcd  at  the  idea  that  Socrates,  or  any  other 
creature,  was  mortal  by  following  the  form  of  the  syllogism. 
If,  however,  one  who  has  arrived  at  that  notion  by  gather¬ 
ing  and  interpreting  evidence  wishes  to  expound  to  an¬ 
other  person  the  grounds  of  his  belief,  he  might  use  the 
syllogistic  form  and  would  do  so  if  he  wished  to  state  the 
proof  in  its  most  compact  form.  A  lawyer,  for  example,  who 
knows  in  advance  what  he  wants  to  prove,  who  has  a  con¬ 
clusion  already  formed  in  his  mind,  and  who  wishes  to  im¬ 
press  others  with  it,  is  quite  likely  to  put  his  reasonings  into 
syllogistic  form. 

j'  In  short,  these  forma  apply  not  to  reaching  conclusions, 
not  to  arriving  at  beliefs  and  knowledge,  but  to  the  most 
effective  way  in  which  to  set  forth  what  has  already  been 
concluded,  so  as  to  convince  others  (or  oneself  if  one  wishes 
to  recall  to  mind  its  grounds)  of  the  soundness  of  the  re¬ 
sult,  In  the  thinking  by  which  a  conclusion  is  actually 
reached,  observations  are  made  that  turn  out  to  be  aside 
-  from  the  point;  false  clues  are  followed;  fruitless  sugges¬ 
tions  are  entertained;  superfluous  moves  are  made.  Just 
because  you  do  not  know  the  solution  of  your  problem,  you 
have  to  grope  toward  it  and  grope  in  the  dark  or  at  least 
in  an  obscure  light;  you  start  on  lines  of  inquiry  that  in  the 
end  you  give  up.  When  you  are  only  seeking  the  truth  and 


PROCESS  AND  PRODUCT  75 

of  necessity  seeking  somewhat  blindly,  you  are  in  a  radi¬ 
cally  different  position  from  the  one  you  are  in  when  you 
are  already  in  possession  of  truth. 

The  logical  forms  that  characterize  conclusions  reached 
and  adopted  cannot  therefore  prescribe  the  way  in  which 
we  should  attempt  to  arrive  at  a  conclusion  when  we  are 
still  in  a  condition  of  doubt  and  inquiry.  Yet  partial  con¬ 
clusions  emerge  during  the  course  of  reflection.  There  are 
temporary  stopping  places,  landings  of  past  thought  that 
are  also  stations  of  departure  for  subsequent  thought.  We 
do  not  reach  the  conclusion  at  a  single  jump.  At  every  such 
landing  stage  it  is  useful  to  retrace  the  processes  gone 
through  and  to  state  to  oneself  how  much  and  how  little 
of  the  material  previously  thought  about  really  bears  on 
the  conclusion  reached  and  how  it  bears.  Thus  premises  and 
conclusions  are  formulated  at  the  same  time  in  definite  rela¬ 
tion  to  one  another,  and  forms  belong  to  such  formulations. 

Actual  Thinking  Has  Its  Own  Logic;  It  Is  Orderly, 
Reasonable,  Reflective 

The  distinction  between  process  and  product  of  reflective 
inquiry  is  thus  not  fixed  and  absolute.  In  calling  the  process 
‘  psychological  ’  and  the  product  '  logical,’  we  do  not  mean 
that  only  the  final  outcome  is  logical  or  that  the  activity 
that  goes  in  a  series  of  steps  in  time  and  that  involves  per¬ 
sonal  desire  and  purpose  is  not  logical.  Rather,  we  must  , 
distinguish  between  the  logical  form,  which  applies  to  the 
product,  and  the  logical  method,  which  may  and  should  be¬ 
long  to  the  process. 

We  speak  of  the  ‘  logic  ’  of  history;  that  is,  of  the  orderly 
movement  of  events  to  a  concluding  climax.  We  say  that 
one  person  acts  or  talks  ‘  logically,’  another  person  ‘  illogi- 
cally.’  We  do  not  mean  that  the  first  person  acts,  thinks,  or 
talks  in  syllogisms,  but  that  there  is  order,  consecutiveness. 


76  HOW  WE  THINK 

in  what  he  says  and  does;  that  the  means  he  uses  are 
well  calculated  to  reach  the  end  he  has  in  mind.  ‘  Logically  ’ 
in  such  cases  is  a  synonym  for  ‘reasonably.’  The  illogical 
person  wanders  aimlessly ;  he  shifts  his  topic  without  being 
aware  of  it;  he  skips  about  at  random;  he  not  only  jumps  to 
a  conclusion  (all  of  ua  have  to  do  that  at  some  point) ,  but 
he  fails  to  retrace  his  steps  to  see  whether  the  conclusion  to 
which  he  has  jumped  is  supported  by  evidence;  he  makes 
contradictory,  inconsistent  statements  without  being  sensi¬ 
tive  to  what  he  is  doing. 

A  person,  on  the  other  hand,  thinks  logically  when  he  is 
careful  in  the  conduct  of  his  thinking,  when  he  takes  pains 
to  make  sure  he  has  evidence  to  go  upon,  and  when,  after 
reaching  a  conclusion,  he  checks  it  by  the  evidence  he  can 
offer  in  its  support.  In  short,  '  logical,’  as  applied  to  the 
process  of  thinking,  signifies  that  the  course  of  thoughts  is 
carried  on  reflectively,  in  the  sense  in  which  reflection  was 
discriminated  from  other  kinds  of  thinking.  A  bungler  can 
make  a  box,  but  the  joints  will  not  fit  exactly ;  the  edges  will 
not  be  even.  A  skilled  person  will  do  the  work  in  a  way  that 
does  not  waste  time  or  material,  and  the  result  is  firm  and 
neat.  So  it  is  with  thinking. 

When  we  say  a  person  is  thoughtful,  we  mean  something 
more  than  that  he  merely  indulges  in  thoughts.  To  be 
really  thoughtful  is  to  be  logical.  Thoughtful  persona  are 
heedful,  not  rash;  they  look  about,  are  circumspect  instead 
of  going  ahead  blindly.  They  weigh,  ponder,  deliberate  — 
terms  that  imply  a  careful  comparing  and  balancing  of 
evidence  and  suggestions,  a  process  of  evaluating  what 
occurs  to  them  in  order  to  decide  upon  its  force  and  weight 
for  their  problem.  Moreover,  [^the  thoughtful  person  looks 
into  matters;  he  scrutinizes,  inspects,  examines.  He  does  not, 
in  other  words,  take  observations  at  their  face  value,  but 
probes  them  to  see  whether  they  are  what  they  seem  to  be. 


PROCESS  AND  PRODUCT  77 

"Skim  milk  masquerades  as  cream”;  a  fungus  looks  like 
an  edible  mushroom,  but  is  poisonous;  '  fool’s  gold  ’  seems 
like  gold,  but  is  only  iron  pyrites.  There  are  comparatively 
few  cases  in  which  we  can  accept  without  questioning  the 
so-called  '  evidence  of  the  senses’;  the  sun  does  not  really 
travel  around  the  earth ;  the  moon  does  not  actually  change 
its  own  form,  and  so  on.  The  logical  person  inspects  to  make 
sure  of  his  data.  Finally,  the  thoughtful  person  ‘  puts  two 
and  two  together.’(TIe  reckons,  calculates,  casts  up  an  ac¬ 
count.  The  word  ‘  reason  ’  is  connected  etymologically  with 
the  word  '  ratio.’  The  underlying  idea  here  is  exactness  oj 
relationshvp.  All  reflective  thinking  is  a  process  of  detecting 
relations;  the  terms  just  used  indicate  that  good  thinking  is 
not  contented  with  finding  '  any  old  kind  ’  of  relation  but 
searches  until  a  relation  is  found  that  is  as  accurately  de¬ 
fined  as  conditions  pennit.) 

In  Summary 

The  ‘  psychological,’  as  we  use  the  term,  is  not,  then,  op-; 
posed  to  the  ‘  logical.’  As  far  as  an  actual  process  of  thought 
is  truly  reflective,  it  is  alert,  careful,  thorough,  definite,  and 
accurate,  pursuing  an  orderly  course.  In  short,  it  is  then 
logical.  When  we  use  the  term  ‘  logical  ’  in  distinction  from 
the  actual  process  (when  the  latter  is  controlled) ,  we  have 
in  mind  the  formal  arrangement  of  the  final  product  of  a 
particular  process  of  thinking,  the  arrangement  being  such 
as  to  sum  up  the  net  conclusion  and  to  extract  the  exact 
grounds  on  which  that  conclusion  rests.  Loose  thought  leaves 
the  result  hanging  in  the  air,  with  only  a  vague  sense  of 
just  what  has  been  proved  or  arrived  at.  A  genuinely  reflec¬ 
tive  activity  terminates  in  declaring  just  what  the  outcome 
is.  By  formulating  that  outcome  as  definitely  as  possible,  it 
is  converted  into  a  true  conclusion.  Reflective  activity  also 
makes  a  survey,  a  review,  of  the  material  upon  which  alone 


78  HOW  WE  THINK 

this  conclusion  rests,  and  thus  formulates  the  7>remwes  upon 
which  it  rests.  A  geometrical  demonstration,  for  example, 
always  states  at  its  close  just  what  has  been  proved;  and 
if  the  reasoning  is  understood  and  not  merely  memorized, 
the  mind  gra.sp.s  the  demonstrated  proposition  as  a  conclu¬ 
sion;  it  ia  aware  of  the  prior  points  that  prove  it. 


II.  Education  in  Relation  to  Fobm 
Learning  Is  Learning  to  Think 

From  what  has  been  said,  however,  it  is  evident  that  edu¬ 
cation,  upon  its  intellectml  side,  is  vitally  concerned  with 
cultivating  the  attitude  of  reflective  thinking,  preserving  it 
where  it  already  exists,  and  changing  looser  methods  of 
thought  into  stricter  ones  whenever  possible.  Of  course,  edu¬ 
cation  is  not  exhausted  in  its  intellectual  aspect;  there  are 
practical  attitudes  of  ofTiciency  to  he  formed,  moral  dispo¬ 
sitions  to  be  strengthened  and  developed,  e.sthetic  apprecia- 
.  tions  to  be  cultivated.  But  in  all  these  things  there  is  at 
least  an  element  of  conscious  meaning  and  hence  of  tliought. 
Otherwise,  practical  activity  is  mechanical  and  routine, 
morals  are  blind  and  arbitrary,  and  esthetic  appreciation 
is  sentimental  gush.  In  what  follow.s  we  shall  confine  our¬ 
selves,  however,  tc 
1  cally  that,  upon  i 
t  the  formation  of 
“'[.thinking. 

Of  course  intellectual  learning  includes  the  amassing  and 
retention  of  information.  But  information  is  an  undigested 
burden  unless  it  is  understood.  It  is  knowledge  only  as  its 
material  is  comprehended.  And  understanding,  comprehen¬ 
sion,  means  that  the  various  parts  of  the  information  ac¬ 
quired  are  grasped  in  their  relations  to  one  another  —  a  re- 


)  the  intellectual  side.  We  state  emphati-1 
is  intellectual  side  education  consists  in 
wide-awake,  careful,  thorough  habits  of^ 


PROCESS  AND  PRODUCT  79 

suit  that  is  attained  only  when  acquisition  is  accompanied 
by  constant  reflection  upon  the  meaning  of  what  is  studied, 
There  is  an  important  distinction  between  verbal,  mechani¬ 
cal  memory  and  what  older  writers  called  '  judicious  mem¬ 
ory.’  The  latter  seizes  the  hearings  of  what  is  retained  and 
recalled;  it  can,  therefore,  use  the  material  in  new  situa¬ 
tions  where  verbal  memory  would  be  completely  at  a  loss. 

What  we  have  called  ‘  psychological  thinking  ’  is  just  the 
actual  process  that  takes  place.  This,  in  particular  cases, 
may  be  random  and  disorderly  or  else  a  mere  play  of  fan¬ 
tasy.  But  if  it  were  always  nothing  but  that,  not  only  would 
thinking  be  of  no  use,  but  life  could  hardly  be  even  main¬ 
tained.  If  thought  had  nothing  to  do  with  real  conditions 
and  if  it  did  not  move  logically  from  these  conditions  to 
the  thought  of  ends  to  be  reached,  we  should  never  invent, 
or  plan,  or  know  how  to  get  out  of  any  trouble  or  predica¬ 
ment.  'As  we  have  already  noted,  there  are  both  intrinsic  1 
elements  and  pres5.ure.,of.  circumstances  that  introduce  into  | 
thinking  genuinely  logical  or  reflective  qualities. 

The  Connection  between  Process  and  Product  of  Thinking 
Overlooked  by  Two  Educational  Schools 

Curiously  enough,  the  internal  and  necessary  connection 
between  the  actual  process  of  thinking  and  its  intellectual 
product  is  overlooked  by  two  opposite  educational  schools. 

One  of  these  schools  thinks  that  the  mind  is  naturally  so 
illogical  in  its  processes  that  logical  form  must  be  im¬ 
pressed  upon  it  from  without.  It  assumes  that  logical  qual¬ 
ity  belongs  only  to  organized  knowledge  and  that  the  op-, 
erations  of  the  mind  become  logical  only  through  absorption 
of  logically  formulated,  ready-made  material.  In  this  case, 
the  logical  formulations  are  not  the  outcome  of  any  process 
of  thinking  that  is  personally  undertaken  and  carried  out; 
the  formulation  has  been  made  by  another  mind  and  is 


80  HOW  WE  THINK 

presented  in  a  finished  form,  apart  from  the  processes  by 
which  it  was  arrived  at.  Then  it  is  assumed  that  by  some 
i  magic  its  logical  character  will  be  transferred  into  the  minds 
i  of  pupils. 

An  illustration  or  two  will  make  clear  what  is  meant  by 
the  foregoing  statements.  Suppose  the  subject  is  geography. 
The  first  thing  is  to  give  its  definition,  marking  it  off  from 
every  other  subject.  Then  the  various  abstract  terms  upon 
which  depends  the  scientific  development  of  the  science  are 
stated  and  defined  one  by  one  —  pole,  equator,  ecliptic, 
zone  —  from  the  simpler  units  to  the  more  complex  that 
are  formed  out  of  them;  then  the  more  concrete  elements 
are  taken  in  similar  aeries  —  continent,  island,  coast,  prom¬ 
ontory,  cape,  isthmus,  peninsula,  ocean,  lake,  coast,  gulf, 
bay,  and  so  on.  In  acquiring  this  material  the  pupil’s  mind 
is  supposed  not  only  to  gain  important  information,  but,  by 
accommodating  itself  to  ready-made  logical  definitions,  gen- 
/  eralizations,  and  classifications,  gradually  also  to  acquire 
Jogical  habits. 

This  type  of  method  has  been  applied  to  every  subject 
taught  in  the  schools  —  reading,  writing,  music,  physics, 
grammar,  arithmetic.  Drawing,  for  example,  has  been  taught 
on  the  theory  that,  since  all  pictorial  representation  is  a 
matter  of  combining  straight  and  curved  lines,  the  simplest 
procedure  is  to  have  the  pupil  acquire  the  ability  first  to 
draw  straight  lines  in  various  positions  (horizontal,  perpen¬ 
dicular,  diagonals  at  various  angles),  then  typical  curves; 
and  finally,  to  combine  straight  and  curved  lines  in  various 
permutations  to  construct  actual  pictures.  This  seemed  to 
give  the  ideal  ‘  logical  ’  method,  beginning  with  analysis  into 
elements,  and  then  proceeding  in  regular  order  to  more  and 
Imore  complex  syntheses,  each  element  being  defined  when 
used,  and  thereby  clearly  understood. 

Even  when  this  method  in  its  extreme  form  is  not  fol- 


PROCESS  AND  PRODUCT 


81 

lowed,  few  schools  (especially  of  the  middle  or  upper  ele¬ 
mentary  grades)  are  free  from  an  exaggerated  attention  to 
forma  supposedly  necessary  for  the  pupil  to  use  if  he  is  to 
get  his  result  logically.  It  is  held  that  there  are  certain  steps, 
arranged  in  a  certain  order,  that  express  preeminently  an 
understanding  of  the  subject,  and  the  pupil  is  made  to 
‘  analyze  ’  his  procedure  into  these  steps;  i.e.,  to  learn  a  cer¬ 
tain  routine  formula  of  statement.  While  this  method  is 
usually  at  its  height  in  grammar  and  arithmetic,  it  invades 
also  history  and  even  literature,  which  are  then  reduced, 
under  plea  of  intellectual  training,  to  outlines,  diagrams, 
and  other  schemes  of  division  and  subdivision.  In  memoriz-  ’ 
ing  this  simulated  cut-and-dried  copy  of  the  logic  of  an 
adult,  the  child  is  generally  made  to  stultify  his  own  vital 
logical  movement.  The  adoption  by  teachers  of  this  mis¬ 
conception  of  logical  method  has  probably  done  more  than 
anything  else  to  bring  pedagogy  into  disrepute,  for  to  many  • 
persons  '  pedagogy  ’  means  precisely  a  set  of  mechanical, 
self-conscious  devices  for  replacing  by  some  cast-iron  ex¬ 
ternal  scheme  the  personal  mental  movement  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual. 

It  is  evident  from  these  examples  that  in  such  a  scheme 
of  instruction/ the  logical  is  identified  exclusively  with  cer¬ 
tain  formal  properties  of  subject  matter;  with  subject  mat¬ 
ter  defined,  refined,  subdivided,  classified,  organized  ac¬ 
cording  to  certain  principles  of  connection  that  have  been 
worked  out  by  persons  who  are  expert  in  that  particular 
field,  jit  conceives  the  method  of  instruction  to  be  the  de¬ 
vices  by  which  similar  traits  are  imported  into  the  mind 
by  careful  reproduction  of  the  given  material  in  arithmetic, 
geography,  grammar,  physics,  biology,  or  whatnot.  (The 
natural  operations  of  the  mind  are  supposed  to  be  indifier- 
ent  or  even  averse  to  all  logical  achievement.  Hence  the 
mottoes  of  this  school  are  '  discipline,’  '  restraint,’  '  con- 


82  HOW  WE  THINK 

scious  effort,’  ‘  the  necessity  of  tasks,’  and  ao  on.  From  thk 
point  of  view  studies,  ratlicr  than  altiiiukiS  and  liabits,  em¬ 
body  the  logical  factor  in  education.  The  mind  becomea 
logical  only  by  learning  to  conform  to  an  external  subject 
matter",!  To  produce  this  conformity,  the  study  should  first 
be  analyzed  (by  textbook  or  teac'her]  into  its  logical  ele¬ 
ments;  then  each  of  the.se  olemente  .should  be  defined; 
finally,  all  the  elements  should  be  arranged  in  scries  or 
classes  according  to  logical  forniulie  or  general  itrinciples. 
Then  the  pupil  learns  the  definitions  one  by  one  and,  pro¬ 
gressively  adding  one  to  another,  buikts  up  the  logical  sys¬ 
tem,  and  thereby  is  himself  gradually  imbued,  from  with¬ 
out,  with  logical  quality. 

A  reaction  inevitably  occurs  from  the  poor  results  that 
accrue  from  these  profe,ssedly  '  logical  ’  methocts.  Lack  of 
interest  in  study,  habits  of  inattention  and  procrastination, 
positive  aversion  to  intellectual  apidicatiou,  dependence 
upon  sheer  memorizing  and  mechanical  routine  with  only 
a  modicum  of  understanding  by  tlic  pupil  of  what  he  is 
about,  show  that  the  theory  of  logical  definition,  division, 
gradation,  and  system  does  not  work  out  practically  as  it 
is  theoretically  supposed  to  do.  The  consequent  disposition 
—  as  in  every  reaction  —  is  to  go  to  the  opposite  extreme. 
The  ‘  logical '  is  thought  to  be  wholly  artificial  and  extrane¬ 
ous;  teacher  and  pupil  alike  are  to  turn  their  backs  upon 
it,  and  to  give  free  rein  to  the  expression  of  existing  apti¬ 
tudes  and  tastes.  Emphasis  upon  natural  tendencies  and 
powers  as  the  only  possible  starting  point  of  development 
is  indeed  wholesome.  But  the  reaction  is  false,  and  hence 
/  misleading,  in  what  it  ignores  and  denies:  the  presence  of 
/genuinely  intellectual  factors  in  existing  powers  and  in¬ 
terests. 

The  other  type  of  school  really  accepts  the  underlying 
premise  of  the  opposite  educational  theory.  It  also  assumes 


PROCESS  AND  PRODUCT  83 

that  the  mind  is  naturally  averse  to  logical  form ;  it  grounds 
this  conviction  upon  the  fact  that  many  minds  are  rebel¬ 
lious  to  the  particular  logical  forms  in  which  a  certain  type 
of  textbook  presents  its  material.  From  this  fact  it  is  in¬ 
ferred  that  logical  order  is  so  foreign  to  the  natural  opera¬ 
tions  of  the  mind  that  it  is  of  slight  importance  in  educa¬ 
tion,  at  least  in  that  of  the  young,  and  that  the  main  thing 
is  just  to  give  free  play  to  impulses  and  desires  without 
regard  to  any  definitely  intellectvnl  growth.  Hence  the  mot-, 
toes  of  this  school  are  ‘  freedom,’  '  self-expression,'  ‘  indi-j 
viduality,’  ‘  spontaneity,’  ‘  play,’  ‘  interest,’  '  natural  unfold-ll 
ing,’  and  so  on.  In  its  emphasis  upon  individual  attitude 
and  activity,  it  sets  slight  store  upon  organized  subject 
matter.  It  conceives  method  to  consist  of  various  devices  for 
stimulating  and  evoking,  in  their  natural  order  of  growth,  \ 
the  native  potentialities  of  individuals, 

The  Basic  Error  of  the  Two  Schools  Is  the  Same 

Thus  the  basic  error  of  the  two  schools  is  the  same.  Both 
ignore  and  virtually  deny  the  fact  that  tendencies  toward  a 
reflective  and  truly  logical  activity  are  native  to  the  mind, 
and  that  they  show  themselves  at  an  early  period,  since  they 
are  demanded  by  outer  conditions  and  stimulated  by  native 
curiosity.  There  is  an  innate  disposition  to  draw  inferences, 
and  an  inherent  desire  to  experiment  and  test.  The  mind  at 
every  stage  of  growth  has  its  own  logic.  It  entertains  sug¬ 
gestions,  tests  them  by  observation  of  objects  and  events, 
reaches  conclusions,  tries  them  in  action,  finds  them  con¬ 
firmed  or  in  need  of  correction  or  rejection.  A  baby,  even 
at  a  comparatively  early  period,  makes  inferences  in  the 
way  of  expectations  from  what  is  observed,  interpreting 
what  it  sees  as  a  sign  or  evidence  of  something  it  does  not 
observe  with  the  senses.  The  school  of  so-called  ‘  free  self- 
expression  ’  thus  fails  to  note  that  one  thing  that  is  urgent 


84  HOW  WE  THINK 

for  expression  in  the  spontaneous  activity  of  the  young  is 

intellectual  in  character.  Since  this  factor  is  predominantly 

the  educative  one,  as  far  as  instruction  is  concerned,  other 

aspects  of  activity  should  be  made  means  to  its  effective 

operation. 

Any  teacher  who  is  alive  to  the  modes  of  thought  opera¬ 
tive  in  the  natural  experience  of  the  normal  child  will  have 
no  difficulty  in  avoiding  the  identification  of  the  logical  with 
a  ready-made  organization  of  subject  matter,  as  well  as  the 
notion  that  the  way  to  escape  this  error  is  to  pay  no  atten¬ 
tion  to  logical  considerations. (Such  a  teacher  will  have  no 
difficulty  in  seeing  that  the  real  problem  of  intellectual  edu¬ 
cation  is  the  transformation  of  natural  powers, into  expert, 
tested  powers;  the  transformation  of  more  or  less  casual 
curiosity  and  sporadic  suggestion  into  attitudes  of  alert, 
.cautious,  and  thorough  inquiry.  He  will  see  that  the  psycho- 
•  logical  and  the  logical,  instead  of  being  opposed  to  each 
Ijother  (or  even  independent  of  each  other),  are  connected 
^  ias  the  earlier  and  the  terminal,  or  concluding,  stages  of  the 
same  process.  He  will  recognize,  moreover,  that  the  kind  of 
ijlogical,  arrangement  that  marks  subject  matter  at  the  stage 
jlof  maturity  is  not  the  only  kind  possible;  that  the  kind 
(Voimd  in  scientifically  organized  material  is  actually  un- 
;  desirable  until  the  mind  has  reached  a  point  of  maturity 
(where  it  is  capable^pf  understandmgjust  mh?/  this  form, 
irather  than  some  other,  is  adopted. 

That  which  is  strictly  logical  from  the  standpoint  of  sub¬ 
ject  matter  really  represents  the  conclusions  of  an  expert, 
trained  mind.  The  definitions,  divisions,  and  classifications 
of  the  conventional  text  represent  these  conclusions  boiled 
down.  The  only  way  in  which  a  person  can  reach  ability  to 
make  accurate  definitions,  penetrating  classifications,  and 
comprehensive  generalizations  is  by  thinking  alertly  and 
carefully  on  his  own  present  level.  Some  kind  of  intellectual 


PROCESS  AND  PRODUCT  85 

organization  must  be  required,  or  else  habits  of  vagueness, || 
disorder,  and  incoherent  ‘  thinking  ’  will  be  formed.  But  the| 
organizatidfTneed  noF be  thaTwhich  would  satisfy  the  maJ 
ture  expert.  For  the  immature  mind  is  still  in  process  oi 
gaining  the  intellectual  skill  that  the  latter  has  already 
achieved.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  beginner  can 
commence  where  the  adept  stops.  But  the  beginner  should 
be  trained  to  demand  from  himself  eareful  examination, 
consecutiveness,  and  some  sort  of  summary  and  formula-  \ 
tion  of  his  conclusions,  together  with  a  statement  of  the  \ 
reasons  for  them. 


In  Summary 

We  may  summarize  by  saying  that  ‘  logical  ’  has  at  least 
three  different  meanings.  In  its  widest  sense,  any  thinking 
that  is  intended  to  reach  a  conclusion  that  is  to  be  accepted 
and  believed  in  is  logical,  even  though  the  actual  operations 
are  il-logical.  In  the  nan'owest  sense,  ‘  logical  ’  signifies  that 
which  is  demonstrated,  according  to  certain  approved  forms, 
to  follow  from  premises  the  terms  of  which  have  clear  and 
definite  meanings ;  it  signifies  ■proof  of  a  stringeTfit  character. 
Between  the  two  lies  the  meaning,  which  is  educationally 
vital:  systematic  care  to  safeguard  the  processes  of  think¬ 
ing  so  that  it  is  truly  reflective.  In  this  connection,  ‘  logical  ’ 
signifies  the  regulation  of  natural  and  spontaneous  processes ; 
of  observation,  suggestion,  and  testing;  that  is,  thinking  as  ' 
an  art. 


III.  Discipline)  and  FaBEniOM 

The  Conception  of  Discipline 

It  was  remarked  in  the  foregoing  discussion  that  two 
schools  of  educational  thought  have  opposing  mottoes,  oi 
slogans.  One  of  them  makes  discipline  primary;  the  other. 


80  HOW  WE  THINK 

freedom.  The  position  we  have  taken  implies,  however,  that 
each  school  has  a  wrong  notion  of  the  meaning  of  its  own 
professed  principle,  If  the  natural,  or  ‘  psychological,’  proc¬ 
esses  are  lacking  in  all  inherent  logical  quality,  ao  that  the 
latter  has  to  be  imposed  from  without,  then  discipline  must 
be  something  negative.  It  will  be  a  painfully  disagreeable 
forcing  of  mind  away  from  channels  congenial  to  it  into 
channels  of  constraint,  a  process  grievous  at  the  time  but 
necessary  as  preparation  for  a  more  or  less  remote  future, 
Discipline  is  then  generally  identified  with  drill ;  and  drill  ia 
conceived  after  the  mechanical  analogy  of  driving,  by  un¬ 
remitting  blows,  a  foreign  substance  into  a  resistant  mate¬ 
rial;  or  ia  imaged  after  the  analogy  of  the  mechanical  rou¬ 
tine  by  which  raw  recruits  are  trained  to  a  soldierly 
bearing  and  habits  that  are  naturally  wholly  foreign  to 
their  possessors.  Training  of  this  latter  sort,  whether  it  be 
called  '  discipline  ’  or  not,  is  not  mental  discipline.  Its  aim 
and  result  are  not  habits  of  thinking,  but  uniform  external 
modes  of  action.  By  failing  to  ask  what  he  means  by  dis¬ 
cipline,  many  a  teacher  is  misled  into  supposing  that  he  is 
engaged  in  disciplining  the  mind  of  pupils,  when  in  reality 
he  is  creating  an  aversion  to  study  and  a  belief  that  using 
the  mind  is  a  disagreeable,  instead  of  a  delightful,  operation. 

In  truth,  discipline  is  positive  and  constructive.  It  is 
power,  power  of  control  of  the  means  necessary  to  achieve 
ends  and  also  power  to  value  and  test  ends.  A  painter  is 
disciplined  in  his  art  in  the  degree  in  which  he  can  manage 
and  use  effectively  all  the  elements  that  enter  into  his  art 
—  externally,  canvas,  colors,  and  brush;  internally,  his 
power  of  vision  and  imagination.  Practice,  exercise,  are  in¬ 
volved  in  the  acquisition  of  power,  but  they  do  not  take  the 
form  of  meaningless  drill,  but  of  practising  the  art.  They 
occur  as  part  of  the  operation  of  attaining  a  desired  end, 
and  they  are  not  mere  repetition.  Discipline  is  a  product,  an 


PROCESS  AND  PRODUCT  87 

outcome,  an  achievement,  not  something  applied  from  with¬ 
out.  All  genuine  education  terminates  in  discipline,  but  it 
'proceeds  by  engaging  the  mind  in  activities  worth  while  for 
their  own  sake. 


The  Conception  of  Freedom 

This  fact  enables  us  to  see  the  error  in  the  conception  of 
freedom  held  by  the  opposite  school  of  educational  theory. 
The  discipline  that  is  identical  with  trained  power  is  also 
identical  with  freedom.  For  freedom  is  power  to  act  and  to 
execute  independent  of  external  tutelage.  It  signifies  mas¬ 
tery  capable  of  independent  exercise,  emancipated  from  the 
leading  strings  of  others,  not  mere  unhindered  external  op¬ 
eration.  When  spontaneity  or  naturalness  is  identified  with 
more  or  leas  casual  discharge  of  transitory  impulses,  the 
tendency  of  the  educator  is  to  supply  a  multitude  of  stimuli 
in  order  that  spontaneous  activity  may  be  kept  up.  All  sorts 
of  interesting  materials,  equipments,  tools,  modes  of  activ¬ 
ity,  are  provided  in  order  that  there  may  be  no  flagging  of 
free  self-expression.  This  method  overlooks  some  of  the  es¬ 
sential  conditions  of  the  attainment  of  genuine  freedom. 

Freedom  Is  Achieved  by  Conquering  Obstacles 

Direct  immediate  discharge  or  expression  of  an  impulsive 
tendency  is  fatal  to  thinking.  Only  when  the  impulse  is  to 
some  extent  checked  and  thrown  back  upon  itself  does  re¬ 
flection  ensue.  It  is,  indeed,  a  stupid  error  to  suppose  that 
arbitrary  tasks  must  be  imposed  from  without  in  order  to 
furnish  the  factor  of  perplexity  and  difficulty  that  is  the 
necessary  cue  to  thought.  Every  vital  activity  of  any  depth 
and  range  inevitably  meets  obstacles  in  the  course  of  its 
effort  to  realize  itself  —  a  fact  that  renders  the  search  for 
artificial  or  external  problems  quite  superfluous.  The  diffi¬ 
culties  that  present  themselves  within  the  development  of 


gg  HOW  WE  THINK 

an  experience  are,  however,  to  be  cherished  by  the  educator, 
not  minimized,  for  they  are  the  natural  stimuli  to  reflective 
inquiry,  Freedom  does  not  consist  in  keeping  up  an  uninter¬ 
rupted  and  unimpeded  external  activity,  but  is  something 
achiped  through  conquering,  by  personal  reflection,  the 
difficulties  that  prevent  immediate  overflow  into  action  and 
spontaneous  success. 

^hinking  Demands  a  Natural  Development  from  Early 
Childhood 

A  method  that  emphasizes  the  psychological  and  natu¬ 
ral,  yet  fails  to  see  what  an  important  part  of  natural 
tendencies  is  constituted  at  every  period  of  growth  by 
curiosity,  inference,  and  the  desire  to  test,  cannot  secure  a 
natural  development.  In  natural  growth  each  successive 
stage  of  activity  prepares  unconsciously,  but  thoroughly, 
the  conditions  for  the  manifestation  of  the  next  stage  —  as 
in  the  cycle  of  a  plant’s  growth.  There  is  no  ground  for  as¬ 
suming  that  thinking  is  a  special,  isolated  natural  tendency 
that  will  bloom  inevitably  in  due  season  simply  because 
various  sense  and  motor  activities  have  been  freely  mani¬ 
fested  before;  or  because  observation,  memory,  imagination, 
and  manual  skill  have  been  previously  exercised  without 
thought.  Only  when  thinking  is  constantly  employed  in 
using  the  senses  and  muscles  for  the  guidance  and  applica¬ 
tion  of  observations  and  movements  is  the  way  prepared 
for  subsequent  higher  types  of  thinking. 

At  present,  the  notion  is  current  that  childhood  is  almost 
entirely  unreflective —  a  period  of  mere  sensory,  motor,  and 
memory  development,  while  adolescence  suddenly  brings 
the  manifestation  of  thought  and  reason. 

Adolescence  is  not,  however,  a  synonym  for  magic.  Doubt¬ 
less  youth  should  bring  with  it  an  enlargement  of  the  hori¬ 
zon  of  childhood,  a  susceptibility  to  larger  concerns  and 


PROCESS  AND  PRODUCT  89 

issues,  a  more  generous  and  a  more  general  standpoint  to¬ 
ward  nature  and  social  life.  This  development  affords  an 
opportunity  for  thinking  of  a  more  comprehensive  and  ab¬ 
stract  type  than  has  previously  obtained.  But  thinking  itself 
remains  just  what  it  has  been  all  the  time,  a  matter  of  fol¬ 
lowing  up  and  testing  the  conclusions  suggested  by  the  facts 
and  events  of  life.  Thinking  begins  as  soon  as  the  baby  who 
has  lost  the  ball  that  he  is  playing  with  begins  to  foresee  the 
possibility  of  something  not  yet  existing  —  its  recovery  — 
and  begins  to  forecast  steps  toward  the  realization  of  this 
possibility,  and,  by  experimentation,  to  guide  his  acts  by  his 
ideas  and  thereby  also  test  the  ideas.  Only  by  making  the 
most  of  the  thought  factor  already  active  in  the  experiences 
of  childhood,  is  there  any  promise  or  warrant  for  the  emer¬ 
gence  of  superior  reflective  power  at  adolescence  or  at  any 
later  period. 

Mental  Habits,  whether  Good  or  Bad,  Are  Certain 
to  Be  Formed 

In  any  case  positive  habits  are  being  formed:  if  not  hab¬ 
its  of  careful  looking  into  things,  then  habits  of  hasty,  heed¬ 
less,  impatient  glancing  over  the  surface;  if  not  habits  of 
consecutively  following  up  the  suggestions  that  occur,  then 
habits  of  haphazard,  grasshopper-like  guessing;  if  not  hab¬ 
its  of  suspending  judgment  till  inferences  have  been  tested 
by  the  examination  of  evidence,  then  habits  of  credulity  al¬ 
ternating  with  flippant  incredulity,  belief  or  unbelief  being 
based,  in  either  case,  upon  whim,  emotion,  or  accidental  cir¬ 
cumstances.  The  only  way  to  achieve  traits  of  carefulness, 
thoroughness,  and  continuity  (traits  that  are,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  elements  of  the  ‘  logical ')  is  by  exercising  these 
traits  from  the  beginning,  and  by  seeing  to  it  that  conditions 
call  for  their  exercise. 


90 


HOW  WE  THINK 


Genuine  Freedom  Is  Intellectual 

Genuine  freedom,  in  abort,  is  intellectual ;  it  rests  in  the 
trained  power  0/  thought,  in  ability  to  ‘  turn  things  over,’  to 
look  at  matters  deliberately,  to  judge  whether  the  amount 
and  kind  of  evidence  requisite  for  decision  is  at  hand,  and 
if  not,  to  tell  where  and  how  to  seek  such  evidence.  If  a 
man’s  actions  are  not  guided  by  thoughtful  conclusions,  then 
they  are  guided  by  inconsiderate  impulse,  unbalanced  ap¬ 
petite,  caprice,  or  the  circumstances  of  the  moment.  To  cul¬ 
tivate  unhindered,  unreflective  external  activity  is  to  foster 
enslavement,  for  it  leaves  the  person  at  the  mercy  of  appe¬ 
tite,  sense,  and  circumstance. 


CHAPTER  SIX 


examples  of  inference  and 

TESTING 


We  have  in  previous  chapters  given  an  outline  account  oi 
the  nature  of  reflective  thinking.  We  have  stated  some  rea¬ 
sons  why  it  is  necessary  to  use  educational  means  to  secure 
its  development  and  have  considered  the  intrinsic  resources, 
the  difficulties,  and  ulterior  purpose  of  its  educational  train¬ 
ing —  the  formation  of  disciplined  logical  ability  to  think. 
We  come  now  to  some  descriptions  of  simple  genuine  cases 
of  thinking,  selected  from  the  class  papers  of  students. 

I.  Illustrations  of  Reflective  Activity 

We  have  had  repeated  occasion  to  notice  that  there  are 
both  external  and  internal  circumstances  that  call  out  and 
that  guide,  to  some  extent,  thought  of  the  reflective  kind. 
Practical  needs  In  connection  with  existing  conditions,  natu¬ 
ral  and  social,  evoke  and  direct  thought.  We  begin  with  an 
instance  of  that  sort.  We  have  noted  also  that  curiosity  is  a 
strong  drive  from  within,  and  accordingly  our  second  ex¬ 
ample  is  drawn  from  that  field.  Finally,  a  mind  that  is 
already  exercised  in  scientific  subjects  will  have  inquiry 
aroused  by  intellectual  problems,  and  our  third  instance 
is  of  that  type. 

A  Case  of  Practical  Deliberation 

The  other  day,  when  I  was  down  town  on  16th  Street, 
a  clock  caught  my  eye.  I  saw  that  the  hands  pointed  to 


92 


HOW  WE  THINK 


12:20.  This  suggested  that  I  had  an  engagement  at 
124th  Street,  at  one  o’clock.  I  reasoned  that  as  it  had 
taken  me  an  hour  to  come  down  on  a  surface  car,  I 
should  probably  be  twenty  minutes  late  if  I  returned 
the  same  way.  I  might  save  twenty  minutes  by  a  sub¬ 
way  express.  But  was  there  a  station  near?  If  not,  I 
might  lose  more  than  twenty  minutes  in  looking  for  one. 
Then  I  thought  of  the  elevated,  and  I  saw  there  was 
such  a  line  within  two  blocks.  But  where  was  the  sta¬ 
tion?  If  it  were  several  blocks  above  or  below  the  street 
I  was  on,  I  should  lose  time  instead  of  gaining  it.  My 
mind  went  back  to  the  subway  express  as  quicker  than 
the  elevated ;  furthermore,  I  remembered  that  it  went 
nearer  than  the  elevated  to  the  part  of  124th  Street  I 
wished  to  reach,  so  that  time  would  be  saved  at  the  end 
of  the  journey.  I  concluded  in  favor  of  the  subway,  and 
reached  my  destination  by  one  o’clock. 

A  Case  of  Reflection  upon  an  Observation 

Projecting  nearly  horizontally  from  the  upper  deck 
of  the  ferryboat  on  which  I  daily  cross  the  river  is  a 
long  white  pole,  bearing  a  gilded  ball  at  its  tip.  It  sug¬ 
gested  a  flagpole  when  I  first  saw  it;  its  color,  shape, 
and  gilded  ball  agreed  with  this  idea,  and  these  reasons 
seemed  to  justify  me  in  this  belief.  But  soon  difficulties 
presented  themselves.  The  pole  was  nearly  horizontal, 
an  imusual  position  for  a  flagpole;  in  the  next  place, 
there  was  no  pulley,  ring,  or  cord  by  which  to  attach  a 
flag;  finally,  there  were  elsewhere  two  vertical  staffs 
from  which  flags  were  occasionally  flown.  It  seemed 
probable  that  the  pole  was  not  there  for  flag-flying. 

I  then  tried  to  imagine  all  possible  purposes  of  such 
a  pole,  and  to  consider  for  which  of  these  it  was  best 
suited:  (a)  Possibly  it  was  an  ornament.  But  as  all  the 


93 


inference  and  testing 

ferryboats  and  even  the  tugboats  carried  poles,  this 
hypothesis  was  rejected,  (b)  Possibly  it  was  the  termi¬ 
nal  of  a  wireless  telegraph.  But  the  same  considerations 
made  this  improbable.  Besides,  the  more  natural  place 
for  such  a  terminal  would  be  the  highest  part  of  the 
boat,  on  top  of  the  pilot  house,  (c)  Its  purpose  might 
be  to  point  out  the  direction  in  which  the  boat  is  moving. 

In  support  of  this  conclusion,  I  discovered  that  the 
pole  was  lower  than  the  pilot  house,  so  that  the  steers¬ 
man  could  easily  see  it.  Moreover,  the  tip  was  enough 
higher  than  the  base,  so  that,  from  the  pilot’s  position, 
it  must  appear  to  project  far  out  in  front  of  the  boat. 
Moreover,  the  pilot  being  near  the  front  of  the  boat,  he 
would  need  some  such  guide  as  to  its  direction.  Tug¬ 
boats  would  also  need  poles  for  such  a  purpose.  This 
hypothesis  was  so  much  more  probable  than  the  others 
that  I  accepted  it.  I  formed  the  conclusion  that  the 
pole  was  set  up  for  the  purpose  of  showing  the  pilot 
the  direction  in  which  the  boat  pointed,  to  enable  him 
to  steer  correctly. 

A  Case  of  Reflection  Involving  Experiment 

In  washing  tumblers  in  hot  soapsuds  and  placing 
them  mouth  downward  on  a  plate,  I  noticed  that  bub¬ 
bles  appeared  on  the  outside  of  the  mouth  of  the  tum¬ 
blers  and  then  went  inside.  Why?  The  presence  of 
bubbles  suggests  air,  which  I  note  must  come  from 
inside  the  tumbler.  I  see  that  the  soapy  water  on  the 
plate  prevents  escape  of  the  air  save  as  it  may  be  caught 
in  bubbles.  But  why  should  air  leave  the  tumbler? 
There  was  no  substance  entering  to  force  it  out.  It  must 
have  expanded.  It  expands  by  increase  of  heat  or  by 
increase  of  pressure,  or  by  both.  Could  the  air  have  be¬ 
come  heated  after  the  tumbler  was  taken  from  the  hot 


HOW  WE  THINK 


94 

auda?  Clearly  not  the  air  that  was  already  entangled  in 
the  water.  If  heated  air  was  the  cause,  cold  air  must 
have  entered  in  transferring  the  tumblers  from  the  suds 
to  the  plate.  I  test  to  see  whether  this  supposition  is  true 
by  taking  several  more  tumblers  out.  Some  I  shake  so  as 
to  make  sure  of  entrapping  cold  air  in  them.  Some  I  take 
out,  holding  them  mouth  downward  in  order  to  prevent 
cold  air  from  entering.  Bubbles  appear  on  the  outside  of 
every  one  of  the  former  and  on  none  of  the  latter.  I 
must  be  right  in  my  inference.  Air  from  the  outside  must 
have  been  expanded  by  the  heat  of  the  tumbler,  which 
explains  the  appearance  of  the  bubbles  on.  the  outside. 

But  why  do  they  then  go  inside?  Cold  contracts.  The 
tumbler  cooled  and  also  the  air  inside  it.  Tension  was 
removed,  and  hence  bubbles  appeared  inside,  To  be 
sure  of  this,  I  test  by  placing  a  cap  of  ice  on  the  tumbler 
while  the  bubbles  are  still  forming  outside.  They  soon 
reverse. 


These  Three  Cases  Form  a  Series 

These  three  cases  have  been  purposely  selected  so  as  to 
form  a  series  from  the  more  rudimentary  to  more  compli¬ 
cated  cases  of  reflection.  The  first  illustrates  the  kind  of 
thinking  done  by  everyone  during  the  day’s  business,  in 
which  neither  the  data  nor  the  ways  of  dealing  with  them 
lie  outside  the  limits  of  everyday  experience.  The  last  fur¬ 
nishes  a  case  in  which  neither  problem  nor  mode  of  solution 
would  have  occurred  except  to  one  with  some  prior  scientific 
training.  The  second  case  forms  a  natural  transition ;  its  ma¬ 
terials  lie  well  within  the  bounds  of  everyday,  unspeoialized 
experience;  but  the  problem,  instead  of  being  directly  in¬ 
volved  in  the  person’s  business,  arises  indirectly  in  connec¬ 
tion  with  what  he  happened  to  be  doing  and  appeals  to  a 
somewhat  theoretic  and  impartial  interest. 


INFERENCE  AND  TESTING  96 

In  the  next  chapter  we  shall  give  an  analytic  account  of 
■y^hat  the  three  instances  exhibit  in  common.  In  what  im¬ 
mediately  follows  we  shall  set  forth,  first,  how  they  all  illus¬ 
trate  the  nature  of  that  operation  of  inference  which  is  the 
heart  of  all  intelligent  action,  and  second,  how  the  aim  and 
outcome  of  thinking  in  all  cases  is  the  transformation  of  a 
dubious  and  perplexing  situation  into  a  settled,  or  deter¬ 
minate,  one. 


11.  iNFEaENCia  TO  THE  UNKNOWN 
No  Thought  without  Inference 

In  every  case  of  reflective  activity,  a  person  finds  himself 
confronted  with  a  given,  present  situation  from  which  he 
has  to  arrive  at,  or  conclude  to,  something  else  that  is  not 
present.  This  process  of  arriving  at  an  idea  of  what  is  absent 
on  the  basis  of  what  is  at  hand  is  inference.  What  is  present 
carries  or  bears  the  mind  over  to  the  idea  and  ultimately 
the  acceptance  of  something  else.  From  the  consideration 
of  established  facts  of  location  and  time  of  day,  the  person 
in  the  first  case  cited  made  an  inference  as  to  the  best  way 
to  travel  in  order  to  keep  an  appointment,  which  is  a  future 
and,  at  first,  uncertain  event.  From  observed  and  remem¬ 
bered  facta,  the  second  person  inferred  the  probable  use  of 
a  long  pole.  From  the  presence  under  certain  conditions  of 
bubbles  and  from  a  knowledge  of  securely  established  phys¬ 
ical  facts  and  principles,  the  third  person  inferred  the  expla¬ 
nation  or  cause  of  a  particular  event,  previously  unknown; 
namely,  the  movement  of  water  in  the  form  of  bubbles  from 
the  outside  to  the  inside  of  a  tumbler. 


96 


HOW  WE  THINK 


Inference  Involves  a  Leap 

Every  inference,  just  becauae  it  goes  beyond  ascertained 
and  known  facts,  which  are  given  either  by  observation  or 
by  recollection  of  prior  knowledge,  involves  a  jwmp  from  the 
known  into  the  unknown.  It  involves  a  leap  beyond  what 
is  given  and  already  established.  As  we  have  already  noted, ‘ 
the  inference  occurs  via  or  through  the  suggestion  that  is 
aroused  by  what  is  seen  and  remembered.  Now,  while  the 
suggestion  pops  into  the  mind,  just  what  suggestion  occurs 
depends  first  upon  the  experience  of  the  person.  This  in 
turn  is  dependent  upon  the  general'  state  of  culture  of  the 
time ;  suggestions,  for  example,  that  occur  readily  now  could 
not  possibly  spring  up  in  the  mind  of  a  savage.  Second,  sug¬ 
gestions  depend  upon  the  person’s  own  preferences,  desires, 
interests,  or  even  his  immediate  state  of  passion.  The  in¬ 
evitableness  of  suggestion,  the  lively  force  with  which  it 
springs  before  the  mind,  the  natural  tendency  to  accept  it 
if  it  is  plausible  or  not  obviously  contradicted  by  facts,  indi¬ 
cate  the  necessity  of  controlling  the  suggestion  which  is 
made  the  basis  of  an  inference  that  is  to  be  believed. 

Proving  Is  Testing 

This  control  of  inference  prior  to,  and  on  behalf  of,  belief 
constitutes  ‘proof.  To  prove  a  thing  means  primarily  to  test 
it.  The  guest  bidden  to  the  wedding  feast  excused  himself 
because  he  had  to  'prove  his  oxen.  Exceptions  are  said  to 
prove  a  rule;  i.e.,  they  furnish  instances  so  extreme  that 
they  try  in  the  severest  fashion  its  applicability;  if  the  rule 
will  stand  such  a  test,  there  is  no  good  reason  for  further 
doubting  it.  Not  until  a  thing  has  been  tried  —  ‘  tried  out,’  in 
colloquial  language  —  do  we  know  its  true  worth.  Till  then 
it  may  be  pretense,  a  bluff.  But  the  thing  that  has  come  out 
1  See  pages  10  and  41. 


INFERENCE  AND  TESTING  97 

victorious  in  a  test  or  trial  of  strength  carries  its  credentials 
with  it;  it  is  approved,  because  it  has  been  proved.  Its  value 
is  clearly  evinced,  shown;  i.e.,  demonstrated.  So  it  is  with 
inferences.  The  mere  fact  that  inference  in  general  is  an 
invaluable  function  does  not  guarantee,  nor  does  it  even 
help  out,  the  correctness  of  any  particular  inference.  Any 
inference  may  go  astray;  as  we  have  seen,  there  are  stand¬ 
ing  influences  ever  ready  to  instigate  it  to  go  wrong.  What 
is  important  is  that  every  inference  he  a  tested  inference; 
or  (since  often  this  is  not  possible)  that  we  discriminate  be¬ 
tween  beliefs  that  rest  upon  tested  evidence  and  those  that 
do  not,  and  be  accordingly  on  our  guard  as  to  the  kind  and 
degree  of  assent  or  belief  that  is  fustified. 

Two  Kinds  of  Testing 

All  three  instances  manifest  the  presence  of  testing  opera¬ 
tions  that  transform  what  would  otherwise  have  been  loose 
thinking  into  reflective  activity.  Examination  reveals  that 
the  testing  is  of  two  kinds.  Suggested  inferences  are  tested 
in  thought  to  see  whether  different  elements  in  the  sugges¬ 
tion  are  coherent  with  one  another.  They  are  also  tested, 
after  one  has  been  adopted,  by  action  to  see  whether  the 
consequences  that  are  anticipated  in  thought  occur  in  fact. 
A  good  example  of  this  second  kind  of  proving  is  found  in 
the  first  case  cited,  where  reasoning  had  led  to  the  conclu¬ 
sion  that  the  use  of  the  subway  would  bring  the  person  to 
the  place  of  his  appointment  in  time.  He  tried  or  tested  the 
idea  by  acting  upon  it,  and  the  result  confirmed  the  idea  by 
bringing  what  was  inferred  actually  to  pass. 

In  the  second  case,  the  test  by  action  could  occur  only  as 
the  person  imagined  himself  in  the  place  of  the  pilot  who 
was  using  the  pole  to  steer  by.  The  test  of  coherence  or  con¬ 
sistency  is  markedly  in  evidence.  Suggestions  of  flagpole, 
ornament,  wireless,  were  rejected  because,  as  soon  as  they 


98  HOW  WE  THINK 

were  reflected  upon,  it  was  seen  that  they  did  not  fit  into 
some  elements  of  the  observed  facts;  they  were  dropped 
because  they  failed  to  agree  with  these  elements,  The  idea 
that  the  pole  was  used  to  show  the  direction  of  movement 
of  the  boat,  on  the  contrary,  was  found  to  agree  with  a  num¬ 
ber  of  important  elements,  such  as  (a)  the  need  of  the  pilot, 
(b)  the  height  of  the  pole,  (c)  the  relative  locations  of  its 
base  and  tip. 

In  the  third  instance,  both  kinds  of  testing  are  employed. 
After  the  conclusion  was  reached,  it  was  acted  upon  by  a 
further  experiment,  undertaken  not  only  in  imagination  but 
also  in  fact.  A  cap  of  ice  was  placed  upon  the  tumbler,  and 
the  bubbles  behaved  as  they  should  behave  if  the  inference 
was  the  correct  one.  Hence  it  was  borne  out,  corroborated, 
verified.  Others  testing  acts  occurred  in  the  process  by  using 
different  ways  of  taking  tumblers  out  of  the  water.  The  test¬ 
ing  of  consistency  in  thought  occurred  by  reflecting  upon 
the  nature  of  expansion  in  its  relation  to  heat  and  by  con¬ 
sidering  whether  the  observed  phenomena  agreed  with  the 
facts  that  would  have  to  follow  from  this  principle.  Obvi¬ 
ously  the  use  of  both  methods  of  proving  a  proposed  in¬ 
ference  is  better  than  one  alone.  The  two  methods  do  not 
differ,  however,  in  kind.  Testing  in  thought  for  consistency 
involves  acting  in  imagination.  The  other  mode  carries  the 
imagined  act  out  overtly.  True  inference  is  defi.ned  first  as 
involving  a  leap  to  a  suggested  conclusion,  and  second  as 
trying  the  suggestion  to  determine  its  agreement  with  the 
requirements  of  the  situation.  The  original  pattern  of  re¬ 
flective  action  is  set  by  cases  in  which  the  need  for  doing 
something  is  urgent,  and  where  the  results  of  what  is  done 
test  the  value  of  thought.  As  intellectual  curiosity  develops, 
connection  with  overt  action  becomes  indirect  and  incidental. 
Yet  it  persists  even  if  only  in  imagination. 


INFERENCE  AND  TESTING 


99 


m.  Thinking  Moves  from  a  Doubtful  to  a 
Settled  Situation 

It  Arises  from  a  Directly  Experienced  Situation 

Examination  of  the  instances  will  show  that  in  each  case 
thinking  arises  out  of  a  directly  experienced  situation.  Per¬ 
sons  do  not  just  think  at  large,  nor  do  ideas  arise  out  of 
nothing.  In  one  case  a  student  is  busy  in  a  certain  part  of  a 
city  and  is  reminded  of  an  engagement  at  another  place. 
In  the  second  case  a  person  is  engaged  in  riding  on  a  ferry¬ 
boat  and  begins  to  wonder  about  something  in  the  construc¬ 
tion  of  the  boat.  In  the  third  case  a  student  with  prior  scien¬ 
tific  training  is  busy  washing  dishes.  In  each  case  the  nature 
of  the  situation  as  it  is  actually  experienced 'arouses  inquiry 
and  calls  out  reflection. 

There  is  nothing  in  this  fact  peculiar  to  these  special  in¬ 
stances.  Go  'through  your  own  experience  and  you  will  not 
find  a  case  where  thinking  started  up  out  of  nothing.  Some¬ 
times  the  train  of  thoughts  will  have  taken  you  so  far  away 
from  the  starting  point  that  you  will  have  difficulty  in 
getting  back  to  that  prior  something  out  of  which  the  think¬ 
ing  arose,  but  follow  the  thread  far  enough  and  you  will  find 
some  situation  that  is  directly  experienced,  something  un¬ 
dergone,  done,  enjoyed,  or  suffered,  and  not  just  thought  of. 
Reflection  is  occasioned  by  the  character  of  this  primary 
situation.  It  does  not  merely  grow  out  of  it,  but  it  refers 
back  to  it.  Its  aim  and  outcome  are  decided  by  the  situation 
out  of  which  it  arose. 

Probably  the  most  frequent  cause  of  failure  in  school  to 
secure  genuine  thinking  from  students  is  the  failure  to  in¬ 
sure  the  existence  of  an  experienced  situation  of  such  a 
nature  as  to  call  out  thinking  in  the  way  in  which  these  out- 
of-school  situations  do.  A  teacher  was  troubled  by  the  fail- 


100  HOW  WE  THINK 

ure  of  pupils,  when  dealing  with  arithmetical  problems  in 
multiplication  involving  decimals,  to  place  the  decimal 
point  correctly.  The  numerical  figures  would  be  correct,  but 
the  values  all  wrong.  One  student  might,  for  example,  say 
$320.16;  another,  $32,016;  and  a  third,  $3201.60.  This  result 
showed  that,  while  the  pupils  could  manipulate  figures  cor¬ 
rectly,  they  did  not  think.  For  if  they  had  used  thought, 
they  would  not  vary  so  arbitrarily  in  grasping  the  values 
involved.  Accordingly  he  sent  the  pupils  to  a  lumberyard 
to  purchase  boards  for  use  in  the  manual-training  shop, 
having  arranged  with  the  dealer  to  let  them  figure  the  cost 
of  their  purchases.  The  same  numerical  operations  were 
involved  as  in  the  textbook  problems.  No  mistakes  at  all 
were  made  in  placing  the  decimal.  The  situation  itself  in¬ 
duced  them  to  think  and  controlled  their  grasp  of  the  values 
involved.  The  contrast  between  the  textbook  problem  and  the 
requirements  of  the  actual  purchase  in  the  lumberyard  pro¬ 
vides  an  excellent  example  of  the  necessity  of  a  situation  in 
order  to  induce  and  direct  thought. 

It  Moves  toward  a  Settled  Situation 

Examination  of  the  three  cases  also  shows  that  each  situa¬ 
tion  is  in  some  fashion  uncertain,  perplexed,  troublesome,  if 
only  in  offering  to  the  mind  an  unresolved  difficulty,  an  un¬ 
settled  question.  It  shows  in  each  case  that  the  function  of 
reflection  is  to  bring  about  a  new  situation  in  which  the  dif¬ 
ficulty  is  resolved,  the  confusion  cleared  away,  the  trouble 
smoothed  out,  the  question  it  puts  answered.  Any  particular 
process  of  thinking  naturally  comes  to  its  close  when  the 
situation  before  the  mind  is  settled,  decided,  orderly,  clear, 
for  then  there  is  nothing  to  call  out  reflection  until  a  new 
bothersome  or  doubtful  situation  arises. 

The  junction  of  reflective  thought  is,  therefore,  to  trans¬ 
form.  a  situation  in  which  there  is  experienced  obscurity, 


INFERENCE  AND  TESTING  IQl 

doubt,  conjlict,  disturbance  0/  some  sort,  into  a  situation 
that  is  clear,  coherent,  settled,  harmonious. 

The  stated  conclusion,  the  conclusion  that  is  set  forth  in  a 
proposition,  is  not  the  final  conclusion  but  is  the  key  to  its 
formation.  For  example,  the  first  person  reached  the  con¬ 
clusion  "  the  best  way  to  124th  Street  is  the  subway  train.” 
But  that  conclusion  was  only  the  key  to  reaching  the  ulti¬ 
mate  conclusion;  namely,  the  keeping  of  an  engagement. 
Thinking  was  the  means  of  developing  the  original,  per¬ 
plexed  situation  into  an  eventual,  satisfactory  one.  You  can 
readily  make  similar  analyses  in  the  case  of  the  other  two 
illustrations.  One  great  difficulty  with  the  '  logical,’  the  ex¬ 
clusively  formal  type  of  which  we  spoke  in  the  previous 
chapter,  is  that  it  begins  and  ends  with  mere  propositions 
instead  of  bringing  before  the  imagination  the  two  actual 
life-situations  to  which  the  propositions  refer;  the  one, 
which  contains  the  doubt  or  difficulty,  and  the  other,  which 
is  the  final  desired  outcome  and  which  was  brought  about 
by  means  of  reflection. 

There  is  no  better  way  to  decide  whether  genuine  infer¬ 
ence  has  taken  place  than  to  ask  whether  it  terminated  in 
the  substitution  of  a  clear,  orderly,  and  satisfactory  situa¬ 
tion  for  a  perplexed,  confused,  and  discordant  one.  Partial 
and  ineffectual  thinking  ends  in  conclusions  that  are  for¬ 
mally  correct  but  that  make  no  difference  in  what  is  per¬ 
sonally  and  immediately  experienced.  Vital  inference  always 
leaves  one  who  thinks  with  a  world  that  is  experienced  as 
different  in  some  respect,  for  some  object  in  it  has  gained 
in  clarity  and  orderly  arrangement.  Genuine  thinking  winds 
up,  in  short,  with  an  appreciation  of  new  values. 


OHAPTEB  SEVEN 


ANALYSIS  OF  REFLECTIVE 
THINKING 


I.  Facts  and  Ideas 

When  a  situation  arises  containing  a  difficulty  or  per¬ 
plexity,  the  person  who  finds  himself  in  it  may  take  one 
of  a  number  of  courses.  He  may  dodge  it,  dropping  the 
activity  that  brought  it  about,  turning  to  something  else. 
He  may  indulge  in  a  flight  of  fancy,  imagining  himself 
powerful  or  wealthy,  or  in  some  other  way  in  possession  of 
the  means  that  would  enable  him  to  deal  with  the  difficulty. 
Or,  finally,  he  may  face  the  situation,  In  this  case,  he  begins 
to  reflect. 

Reflection  Includes  Observation 

The  moment  he  begins  to  reflect,  he  begins  of  necessity 
to  observe  in  order  to  take  stock  of  conditions.  Some  of  these 
observations  are  made  by  direct  use  of  the  senses;  others 
by  recollecting  observations  previously  made  either  by 
himself  or  by  others.  The  person  who  had  the  engagement 
to  keep,  notes  with  his  eyes  his  present  location,  recalls  the 
place  where  he  should  arrive  at  one  o’clock,  and  brings  back 
to  mind  the  means  of  transportation  with  which  he  is  ac¬ 
quainted  and  their  respective  locations.  In  this  way  he  gets 
as  clear  and  distinct  a  recognition  as  possible  of  the  nature 
of  the  situation  with  which  he  has  to  deal.  Some  of  the  con¬ 
ditions  are  obstacles  and  others  are  aids,  resources.  No 
matter  whether  these  conditions  come  to  him  by  direct 


analysis  of  reflective  thinking  103 

perception  or  by  memory,  they  form  the  ^  jacts  of  the  case.’ 
They  are  the  things  that  are  there,  that  have  to  be  reckoned 
with.  Like  all  facts,  they  are  stubborn.  They  cannot  be  got 
out  of  the  way  by  magic  just  because  they  are  disagreeable. 
It  is  no  use  to  wish  they  did  not  exist  or  were  different.  They 
must  be  taken  for  just  what  they  are.  Hence  observation 
and  recollection  must  be  used  to  the  full  so  as  not  to  glide 
over  or  to  mistake  important  features.  Until  the  habit  of 
thinking  is  well  formed,  facing  the  situation  to  discover 
the  facts  requires  an  effort.  For  the  mind  tends  to  dislike 
what  is  unpleasant  and  so  to  sheer  off  from  an  adequate 
notice  of  that  which  is  especially  annoying. 

Reflection  Includes  Suggestions 

Along  with  noting  the  conditions  that  constitute  the  facts 
to  be  dealt  with,  suggestions  arise  of  possible  courses  of 
action.  Thus  the  person  of  our  illustration^  thinks  of  sur¬ 
face  cars,  elevated  trains,  and  the  subway.  These  alterna¬ 
tive  suggestions  compete  with  one  another.  By  comparison 
he  judges  which  alternative  is  best,  which  one  is  the  more 
likely  to  give  a  satisfactory  solution.  The  comparison  takes 
place  indirectly.  The  moment  one  thinks  of  a  possible  solu¬ 
tion  and  holds  it  in  suspense,  he  turns  back  to  the  facts.  He 
has  now  a  point  of  view  that  leads  him  to  new  observations 
and  recollections  and  to  a  reconsideration  of  observations  al¬ 
ready  made  in  order  to  test  the  worth  of  the  suggested  way 
out,  Unless  he  uses  the  suggestion  so  as  to  guide  to  new 
observations  instead  of  exercising  suspended  judgment,  he 
accepts  it  as  soon  as  it  presents  itself.  Then  he  falls  short  of 
truly  reflective  thought.  The  newly  noted  facts  may  (and 
in  any  complex  situation  surely  will)  cause  new  suggestions 
to  spring  up.  These  become  clews  to  further  investigation  of 

1  See  page  92. 


104  HOW  WE  THINK 

conditions.  The  results  of  this  survey  test  and  correct  the 
proposed  inference  or  suggest  a  new  one.  This  continuous 
interaction  of  the  facts  disclosed  by  observation  and  of  the 
suggested  proposals  of  solution  and  the  suggested  methods 
of  dealing  with  conditions  goes  on  till  some  suggested  solu¬ 
tion  meets  all  the  conditions  of  the  case  and  does  not  run 
counter  to  any  discoverable  feature  of  it.“ 

Data  and  Ideas  Are  Correlative  and  Indispensable 
Factors  in  Reflection 

A  technical  term  for  the  observed  facts  is  data.  The  data 
form  the  material  that  has  to  be  interpreted,  accounted  for, 
explained;  or,  in  the  case  of  deliberation  as  to  what  to  do 
or  how  to  do  it,  to  be  managed  and  utilized-  The  suggested 
solutions  for  the  difflculties  disclosed  by  observation  form 
ideas.  Data  (facts)  and  ideas  (suggestions,  possible  solu¬ 
tions)  thus  form  the  two  indispensable  and  correlative 
factors  of  all  reflective  activity.  The  two  factors  are  carried 
on  by  means  respectively  of  observation  (in  which  for  con¬ 
venience  is  included  memory  of  prior  observations  of  similar 
cases)  and  inference.  The  latter  runs  beyond  what  is  actu¬ 
ally  noted,  beyond  what  is  found,  upon  careful  examination, 
to  be  actually  present.  It  relates,  therefore,  to  what  is 
possible,  rather  than  to  what  is  actual.  It  proceeds  by  antici¬ 
pation,  supposition,  conjecture,  imagination.  All  foresight, 
prediction,  planning,  as  well  as  theorizing  and  speculation, 
are  characterized  by  excursion  from  the  actual  into  the  pos¬ 
sible.  Hence  (as  we  have  already  seen)  what  is  inferred 
demands  a  double  test;  first,  the  process  of  forming  the  idea 
or  supposed  solution  is  checked  by  constant  cross  reference 
to  the  conditions  observed  to  be  actually  present;  secondly, 
the  idea  after  it  is  formed  is  tested  by  acting  upon  it,  overtly 

^  The  statementa  just  made  should  be  tested  and  illustrated  by 
reference  to  the  three  oases  set  forth  in  the  previous  chapter. 


analysis  op  reflective  thinking  106 

if  possible,  otherwise  in  imagination.  The  consequences  of 
this  action  confirm,  modify,  or  refute  the  idea. 

We  shall  illustrate  what  has  been  said  by  a  simple  case. 
Suppose  you  are  walking  where  there  is  no  regular  path.  As 
long  as  everything  goes  smoothly,  you  do  not  have  to  think 
about  your  walking;  your  already  formed  habit  takes  care 
of  it.  Suddenly  you  find  a  ditch  in  your  way.  You  think  you 
will  jump  it  (supposition,  plan) ;  but  to  make  sure,  you 
survey  it  with  your  eyes  (observation),  and  you  find  that 
it  is  pretty  wide  and  that  the  bank  on  the  other  side  is  slip¬ 
pery  (facts,  data).  You  then  wonder  if  the  ditch  may  not 
be  narrower  somewhere  else  (idea),  and  you  look  up  and 
down  the  stream  (observation)  to  see  how  matters  stand 
(test  of  idea  by  observation).  You  do  not  find  any  good 
place  and  so  are  thrown  back  upon  forming  a  new  plan.  As 
you  are  casting  about,  you  discover  a  log  (fact  again). 
You  ask  yourself  whether  you  could  not  haul  that  to  the 
ditch  and  get  it  across  the  ditch  to  use  as  a  bridge  (idea 
again) .  You  judge  that  idea  is  worth  trying,  and  so  you  get 
the  log  and  manage  to  put  it  in  place  and  walk  across  (teat 
and  confirmation  by  overt  action). 

If  the  situation  were  more  complicated,  thinking  would 
of  course  be  more  elaborate.  You  can  imagine  a  case  in 
which  making  a  raft,  constructing  a  pontoon  bridge,  or  mak¬ 
ing  a  dugout  would  be  the  ideas  that  would  finally  come  to 
mind  and  have  to  be  checked  by  reference  to  conditions  of 
action  (facts) .  Simple  or  complicated,  relating  to  what  to 
do  in  a  practical  predicament  or  what  to  infer  in  a  scien¬ 
tific  or  philosophic  problem,  there  will  always  be  the  two 
sides;  the  conditions  to  be  accounted  for,  dealt  with,  and  the 
ideas  that  are  plans  for  dealing  with  them  or  are  supposi¬ 
tions  for  interpreting  and  explaining  the  phenomena. 

In  predicting  an  eclipse,  for  example,  a  multitude  of  ob¬ 
served  facts  regarding  position  and  movements  of  earth, 


106  HOW  WE  THINK 

sun,  and  moon,  comes  in  on  one  side,  while  on  the  other  side 
the  ideas  employed  to  predict  and  explain  invol-ve  extensive 
mathematical  calculations.  In  a  philosophic  problem,  the 
facts  or  data  may  be  remote  and  not  susceptible  of  direct 
observation  by  the  senses.  But  still  there  will  be  data,  per¬ 
haps  of  science,  or  of  morals,  art,  or  the  conclusions  of  past 
thinkers,  that  supply  the  subject  matter  to  be  dealt  with 
and  by  which  theories  are  checked.  On  the  other  side,  there 
are  the  speculations  that  come  to  mind  and  that  lead  to 
search  for  additional  subject  matter  which  will  both  de¬ 
velop  the  proposed  theories  as  ideas  and  test  their  value. 
Mere  facts  or  data  are  dead,  as  far  as  mind  is  concerned, 
unless  they  are  used  to  suggest  and  test  some  idea,  some 
way  out  of  a  difficulty.  Ideas,  on  the  other  hand,  are  mere 
ideas,  idle  speculations,  fantasies,  dreams,  unless  they  are 
used  to  guide  new  observations  of,  and  reflections  upon,  ac¬ 
tual  situations,  past,  present,  or  future.  Finally,  they  must 
be  brought  to  some  sort  of  check  by  actual  given  material 
or  else  remain  ideas.  Many  ideas  are  of  great  value  as  ma¬ 
terial  of  poetry,  fiction,  or  the  drama,  but  not  as  the  stuff  of 
knowledge.  However,  ideas  may  be  of  intellectual  use  to  a 
jpenetrating  mind  even  when  they  do  not  find  any  imme- 
Idiate  reference  to  actuality,  provided  they  stay  in  the  mind 
for  use  when  new  facta  come  to  light. 


II.  The  Essential  Functions  op  Replectivb  Activity 

We  now  have  before  us  the  material  for  the  analysis  of  a 
complete  act  of  reflective  activity.  In  the  preceding  chapter 
we  saw  that  the  two  limits  of  every  unit  of  thinking  are  a 
perplexed,  troubled,  or  confused  situation  at  the  beginning 
and  a  cleared-up,  unified,  resolved  situation  at  the  close. 
The  first  of  these  situations  may  be  called  pre-reflective.  It 


analysis  of  reflective  thinking  lor 

seta  the  problem  to  be  solved;  out  of  it  grows  the  question 
that  reflection  has  to  answer.  In  the  final  situation  the  doubt 
has  been  dispelled;  the  situation  is  posf-reflective;  there  re¬ 
sults  a  direct  experience  of  mastery,  satisfaction,  enjoy¬ 
ment.  Here,  then,  are  the  limits  within  which  reflection 
falls. 

Five  Phases,  or  Aspects,  of  Reflective  Thought 

In  between,  as  states  of  thinking,  are  (1)  suggestions,  in 
which  the  mind  leaps  forward  to  a  possible  solution;  (2)  an 
intellectualization  of  the  difficulty  or  perplexity  that  has 
been  felt  (directly  experienced)  into  a  'problem  to  be  solved, 
a  question  for  which  the  answer  must  be  sought;  (3)  the  use 
of  one  suggestion  after  another  as  a  leading  idea,  or  hy~ 
pothesis,  to  initiate  and  guide  observation  and  other  opera¬ 
tions  in  collection  of  factual  material;  (4)  the  mental  elabo¬ 
ration  of  the  idea  or  supposition  as  an  idea  or  supposition 
(reasoning,  in  the  sense  in  which  reasoning  is  a  part,  not  the 
whole,  of  inference) ;  and  (5)  testing  the  hypothesis  by  overt 
or  imaginative  action. 

We  shall  now  take  up  the  five  phases,  or  functions,  one 
by  one. 

The  First  Phase,  Suggestion 

The  most  ‘  natural  ’  thing  for  anyone  to  do  is  to  go  ahead ; 
that  is  to  say,  to  act  overtly.  The  disturbed  and  perplexed 
situation  arrests  such  direct  activity  temporarily.  The  tend¬ 
ency  to  continue  acting  nevertheless  persists.  It  is  diverted 
and  takes  the  form  of  an  idea  or  a  suggestion.  The  idea  of 
what  to  do  when  we  find  ourselves  ‘  in  a  hole  ’  is  a  substi¬ 
tute  for  direct  action.  It  is  a  vicarious,  anticipatory  way  of 
acting,  a  kind  of  dramatic  rehearsal.  Were  there  only  one 
suggestion  popping  up,  we  should  undoubtedly  adopt  it  at 
once.  But  where  there  are  two  or  more,  they  collide  with 


108  HOW  WE  THINK 

one  another,  maintain  the  state  of  suspense,  and  produce 
further  inquiry.  The  first  suggestion  in  the  instance  recently 
cited  was  to  jump  the  ditch,  but  the  perception  of  condi¬ 
tions  inhibited  that  suggestion  and  led  to  the  occurrence  of 
other  ideas. 

Some  inhibition  of  direct  action  is  necessary  to  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  hesitation  and  delay  that  is  essential  to  thinking. 
Thought  is,  as  it  were,  conduct  turned  in  upon  itself  and 
examining  its  purpose  and  its  conditions,  its  resources,  aids, 
and  difficulties  and  obstacles. 

The  Second  Phase,  Intellectualization 

We  have  already  noted  that  it  is  artificial,  so  far  as 
thinking  is  concerned,  to  start  with  a  ready-made  problem, 
a  problem  made  out  of  whole  cloth  or  arising  out  of  a 
vacuum.  In  reality  such  a  '  problem  ’  is  simply  an  assigned 
task.  There  is  not  at  first  a  situation  and  a  problem,  much 
less  just  a  problem  and  no  situation.  There  is  a  troubled, 
perplexed,  trying  situation,  where  the  difficulty  is,  as  it 
were,  spread  throughout  the  entire  situation,  infecting  it  as 
a  whole.  If  we  knew  just  what  the  difficulty  was  and  where 
it  lay,  the  i  oh  of  reflection  would  be  much  easier  than  it  is, 
As  the  saying  truly  goes,  a  question  well  put  is  half  an¬ 
swered.  In  fact,  we  know  what  the  problem  exactly  is  si¬ 
multaneously  with  finding  a  way  out  and  getting  it  resolved. 
Problem  and  solution  stand  out  completely  at  the  same  time. 
Up  to  that  point,  our  grasp  of  the  problem  has  been  more 
or  less  vague  and  tentative. 

A  blocked  suggestion  leads  us  to  reinspect  the  conditions 
that  confront  us.  Then  our  uneasiness,  the  shock  of  dis¬ 
turbed  activity,  gets  stated  in  some  degree  on  the  basis  of 
observed  conditions,  of  objecta.  The  width  of  the  ditch,  the 
slipperiness  of  the  banks,  not  the  mere  presence  of  a  ditch, 
is  the  trouble.  The  difficulty  is  getting  located  and  defined; 


analysis  of  EEFLECTIVE  thinking  109 
it  is  becoming  a  true  problem,  something  intellectual,  not 
just  an  annoyance  at  being  held  up  in  what  we  are  doing. 
The  person  who  is  suddenly  blocked  and  troubled  in  what 
he  is  doing  by  the  thought  of  an  engagement  to  keep  at  a 
time  that  is  near  and  a  place  that  is  distant  has  the  sug¬ 
gestion  of  getting  there  at  once.  But  in  order  to  carry  this 
suggestion  into  effect,  he  has  to  find  means  of  transporta¬ 
tion.  In  order  to  find  them  he  has  to  note  his  present  posi¬ 
tion  and  its  distance  from  the  station,  the  present  time,  and 
the  interval  at  his  disposal.  Thus  the  perplexity  is  more 
precisely  located:  just  so  much  ground  to  cover,  so  much 
time  to  do  it  in. 

The  word  '  problem  '  often  seems  too  elaborate  and  dig¬ 
nified  to  denote  what  happens  in  minor  cases  of  reflection. 
But  in  every  case  where  reflective  activity  ensues,  there  is 
a  process  of  intcllactualizing  what  at  first  is  merely  an  emo¬ 
tional  quality  of  the  whole  situation.  This  conversion  is  ef¬ 
fected  by  noting  more  definitely  the  conditions  that  consti¬ 
tute  the  trouble  and  cause  the  stoppage  of  action. 

The  Third  Phase,  the  Guiding  Idea,  Hypothesis 

The  first  suggestion  occurs  spontaneously;  it  comes  to 
mind  automatically;  it  springs  up;  it  “pops,”  as  we  have 
said,  “  into  the  mind  ” ;  it  flashes  upon  us.  There  is  no  direct 
control  of  its  occurrence;  the  idea  just  comes  or  it  does  not 
come;  that  is  all  that  can  be  said.  There  is  nothing  intel¬ 
lectual  about  its  occurrence.  The  intellectual  element  con¬ 
sists  in  what  we  do  with  it,  how  we  use  it,  after  its  sudden 
occurrence  as  an  idea.  A  controlled  use  of  it  is  made  pos¬ 
sible  by  the  state  of  affairs  just  described.  In  the  degree  in 
which  we  define  the  difficulty  (which  is  effected  by  stat¬ 
ing  it  in  terms  of  objects),  we  get  a  better  idea  of  the  kind 
of  solution  that  is  needed.  The  facts  or  data  set  the  problem 
before  us,  and  insight  into  the  problem  corrects,  modifies, 


110  HOW  WE  THINK 

expands  the  suggestion  that  originally  occurred,  In  this 
fashion  the  suggestion  becomes  a  definite  supposition  or, 
stated  more  technically,  a  hypothesis. 

Take  the  case  of  a  physician  examining  a  patient  or  a 
mechanic  inspecting  a  piece  of  complicated  machinery  that 
does  not  behave  properly.  There  is  something  wrong,  so 
much  is  sure.  But  how  to  remedy  it  cannot  be  told  until  it 
is  known  what  is  wrong.  An  untrained  person  is  likely  to 
make  a  wild  guess  —  the  suggestion  —  and  then  proceed  to 
act  upon  it  in  a  random  way,  hoping  that  by  good  luck  the 
right  thing  will  be  hit  upon.  So  some  medicine  that  appears 
to  have  worked  before  or  that  a  neighbor  has  recommended 
is  tried.  Or  the  person  fusses,  monkeys,  with  the  machine, 
poking  here  and  hammering  there  on  the  chance  of  mak¬ 
ing  the  right  move.  The  trained  person  proceeds  in  a  very 
different  fashion.  He  observes  with  unusual  care,  using  the 
methods,  the  techniques,  that  the  experience  of  physicians 
and  expert  mechanics  in  general,  those  familiar  with  the 
structure  of  the  organism  or  the  machine,  have  shown  to 
be  helpful  in  detecting  trouble. 

The  idea  of  the  solution  is  thus  controlled  by  the  diag¬ 
nosis  that  has  been  made.  But  if  the  case  is  at  all  compli¬ 
cated,  the  physician  or  mechanic  does  not  foreclose  further 
thought  by  assuming  that  the  suggested  method  of  remedy 
is  certainly  right.  He  proceeds  to  act  upon  it  tentatively 
rather  than  decisively.  That  is,  he  treats  it  as  a  guiding 
idea,  a  working  hypothesis,  and  is  led  by  it  to  make  more 
observations,  to  collect  more  facts,  so  as  to  see  if  the  new 
material  is  what  the  hypothesis  calls  for.  He  reasons  that 
if  the  disease  is  typhoid,  then  certain  phenomena  will  be 
found;  and  he  looks  particularly  to  see  if  jiist  these  condi¬ 
tions  are  present.  Thus  both  the  first  and  second  operations 
are  brought  under  control;  the  sense  of  the  problem  be^ 
comes  more  adequate  and  refined  and  the  suggestion  ceases 


analysis  of  reflective  thinking  111 
to  be  a  possibility,  becoming  a  tested  and,  if  possible, 
a  measured  probability. 

The  Fourth  Phase,  Reasoning  (in  the  Narrower  Sense) 

Observations  pertain  to  what  exists  in  nature.  They  con¬ 
stitute  the  facta,  and  these  facta  both  regulate  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  suggestions,  ideas,  hypotheses,  and  test  their  prob¬ 
able  value  as  indications  of  solutions.  The  ideas,  on  the 
other  hand,  occur,  as  we  say,  in  our  heads,  in  our  minds, 
They  not  only  occur  there,  but  are  capable,  as  well,  of  great 
development  there.  Given  a  fertile  suggestion  occurring  in 
an  experienced,  well-informed  mind,  that  mind  is  capable 
of  elaborating  it  until  there  results  an  idea  that  is  quite 
different  from  the  one  with  which  the  mind  started. 

For  example,  the  idea  of  heat  in  the  third  instance  in  the 
earlier  chapter  “  was  linked  up  with  what  the  person  already 
knew  about  heat  —  in  his  case,  its  expansive  force  — 
and  this  in  turn  with  the  contractive  tendency  of  cold,  so 
that  the  idea  of  expansion  could  be  used  as  an  explanatory 
idea,  though  the  mere  idea  of  heat  would  not  have  been 
of  any  avail.  Heat  was  quite  directly  suggested  by  the  ob¬ 
served  conditions;  water  was  felt  to  be  hot.  But  only  a  mind 
with  some  prior  information  about  heat  would  have  rea¬ 
soned  that  heat  meant  expansion,  and  then  used  the  idea 
of  expansion  as  a  working  hypothesis.  In  more  complex 
cases,  there  are  long  trains  of  reasoning  in  which  one  idea 
leads  up  to  another  idea  known  by  previous  test  to  be  re¬ 
lated  to  it.  The  stretch  of  links  brought  to  light  by  reason¬ 
ing  depends,  of  course,  upon  the  store  of  knowledge  that  the 
mind  is  already  in  possession  of.  And  this  depends  not  only 
upon  the  prior  experience  and  special  education  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  who  is  carrying  on  the  inquiry,  but  also  upon  the 
state  of  culture  and  science  of  the  age  and  place.  Reason- 
“  See  page  94. 


112  HOW  WE  THINK 

ing  helps  extend  knowledge,  while  at  the  same  time  it  de¬ 
pends  upon  what  is  already  known  and  upon  the  facilities 
that  exist  for  communicating  knowledge  and  making  it  a 
public,  open  resource. 

!  A  physician  to-day  can  develop,  by  reasoning  from  his 
;  knowledge,  the  implications  of  the  disease  that  symptoms 
suggest  to  him  as  probable  in  a  way  that  would  have  been 
impossible  even  a  generation  ago ;  just  as,  on  the  other  hand, 
he  can  carry  his  observation  of  symptoms  much  farther  be¬ 
cause  of  improvement  in  clinical  instruments  and  the  tech¬ 
nique  of  their  use. 

Reasoning  has  the  same  effect  upon  a  suggested  solution 
that  more  intimate  and  extensive  observation  has  upon  the 
original  trouble.  Acceptance  of  a  suggestion  in  its  first 
form  is  prevented  by  looking  into  it  more  thoroughly.  Con¬ 
jectures  that  seem  plausible  at  first  sight  are  often  found 
unfit  or  even  absurd  when  their  full  consequences  are  traced 
out.  Even  when  reasoning  out  the  bearings  of  a  supposition 
does  not  lead  to  its  rejection,  it  develops  the  idea  into  a 
form  in  which  it  is  more  apposite  to  the  problem.  Only 
when,  for  example,  the  conjecture  that  a  pole  was  an  index 
pole  had  been  thought  out  in  its  implications  could  its  par¬ 
ticular  applicability  to  the  case  in  hand  be  judged.  Sugges¬ 
tions  at  first  seemingly  remote  and  wild  are  frequently  so 
transformed  by  being  elaborated  into  what  follows  from 
them  as  to  become  apt  and  fruitful.  The  development  of  an 
idea  through  reasoning  helps  supply  intervening  or  inter¬ 
mediate  terms  which  link  together  into  a  consistent  whole 
elements  that  at  first  seemingly  conflict  with  each  other, 
some  leading  the  mind  to  one  inference  and  others  to  an 
opposed  one. 

Mathematics  as  Typical  Reasoning.  Mathematics  affords 
the  typical  example  of  how  far  can  be  carried  the  operation 
of  relating  ideas  to  one  another,  without  having  to  depend 


analysis  of  reflective  thinking  113 

upon  the  observations  of  the  senses.  In  geometry  we  start 
with  a  few  simpie  conceptions,  line,  angle,  parallel,  surfaces 
formed  by  lines  meeting,  etc.,  and  a  few  principles  defining 
equalities.  Knowing  something  about  the  equality  of  angles 
made  by  parallel  lines  when  they  intersect  a  straight  line, 
and  knowing,  by  definition,  that  a  perpendicular  to  a 
straight  line  forms  two  right  angles,  by  means  of  a  com¬ 
bination  of  these  ideas  we  readily  determine  that  the  sum 
of  the  interior  angles  of  a  triangle  is  equal  to  two  right 
angles.  By  continuing  to  trace  the  implications  of  theorems 
already  demonstrated,  the  whole  subject  of  plane  figures  is 
finally  elaborated.  The  manipulation  of  algebraic  symbols 
so  as  to  establish  a  series  of  equations  and  other  mathe¬ 
matical  functions  affords  an  even  more  striking  example  of 
what  can  be  accomplished  by  developing  the  relation  of 
ideas  to  one  another. 

When  the  hypothesis  indicated  by  a  series  of  scientific 
observations  and  experiments  can  be  stated  in  mathemati¬ 
cal  form,  that  idea  can  be  transformed  to  almost  any  ex¬ 
tent,  until  it  assumes  a  form  in  which  a  problem  can  be 
dealt  with  most  expeditiously  and  effectively.  Much  of  the 
accomplishment  of  physical  science  depends  upon  an  in¬ 
tervening  mathematical  elaboration  of  ideas.  It  is  not  the 
mere  presence  of  measurements  in  quantitative  form  that 
yields  scientific  knowledge,  but  that  particular  kind  of 
mathematical  statement  which  can  be  developed  by  rea¬ 
soning  into  other  and  more  fruitful  forms  —  a  considera¬ 
tion  which  is  fatal  to  the  claim  to  scientific  standing  of 
many  educational  measurements  merely  because  they  have 
a  quantitative  form. 

The  Fifth  Phase,  Testing  the  Hypothesis  by  Action 

The  concluding  phase  is  some  kind  of  testing  by  overt 
action  to  give  experimental  corroboration,  or  verification, 


HOW  WE  THINK 


114 

of  the  conjectural  idea.  Reasoning  shows  that  ij  the  idea  be 
adopted,  certain  consequences  follow.  So  far  the  conclusion 
is  hypothetical  or  conditional.  If  when  we  look  we  find  pres¬ 
ent  all  the  conditions  demanded  by  the  theory,  and  if  we  find 
the  characteristic  traits  called  for  by  rival  alternatives  to 
be  lacking,  the  tendency  to  believe,  to  accept,  is  almost 
irresistible.  Sometimes  direct  observation  furnishes  corrobo¬ 
ration,  as  in  the  case  of  the  pole  on  the  boat.  In  other  cases, 
as  in  that  of  the  bubbles,  experiment  is  required;  that  is, 
conditions  are  deliberately  ari'anged  in  accord  with  the  re¬ 
quirements  of  an  idea  or  hypothesis  to  see  whether  the  results 
theoretically  indicated  by  the  idea  actually  occur.  If  it  is 
found  that  the  experimental  results  agree  with  the  theoreti¬ 
cal,  or  rationally  deduced,  results,  and  if  there  is  reason  to 
believe  that  only  the  conditions  in  question  would  yield  such 
results,  the  confirmation  is  so  strong  as  to  induce  a  conclu¬ 
sion  —  at  least  until  contrary  facts  shall  indicate  the  ad¬ 
visability  of  its  revision. 

Of  course,  verification  does  not  always  follow.  Sometimes 
consequences  show  failure  to  confirm  instead  of  corrobora¬ 
tion.  The  idea  in  question  is  refuted  by  the  court  of  final 
appeal.  But  a  great  advantage  of  possession  of  the  habit  of 
reflective  activity  is  that  failure  is  not  mere  failure.  It  is  in¬ 
structive.  The  person  who  really  thinks  learns  quite  as  much 
from  his  failures  as  from  hia  successes.  For  a  failure  indi¬ 
cates  to  the  person  whose  thinking  has  been  involved  in  it, 
and  who  has  not  come  to  it  by  mere  blind  chance,  what 
further  observations  should  be  made.  It  suggests  to  him 
what  modifications  should  be  introduced  in  the  hypothesis 
upon  which  he  has  been  operating.  It  either  brings  to  light 
a  new  problem  or  helps  to  define  and  clarify  the  problem  on 
which  he  has  been  engaged.  Nothing  shows  the  trained 
thinker  better  than  the  use  he  makes  of  hia  errors  and  mis¬ 
takes.  What  merely  annoys  and  discourages  a  person  not 


analysis  of  reflective  thinking  115 

accustomed  to  thinking,  or  what  starts  him  out  on  a  new 
course  of  aimless  attack  by  mere  cut-and-try  methods,  is  a 
stimulus  and  a  guide  to  the  trained  inquirer. 

The  Sequence  of  the  Five  Phases  Is  Not  Fixed 

The  five  phases,  terminals,  or  functions  of  thought,  that 
we  have  noted  do  not  follow  one  another  in  a  set  order.  On 
the  contrary,  each  step  in  genuine  thinking  does  something 
to  perfect  the  formation  of  a  suggestion  and  promote  its 
change  into  a  leading  idea  or  directive  hypothesis.  It  does 
something  to  promote  the  location  and  definition  of  the 
problem.  Each  improvement  in  the  idea  leads  to  new  ob¬ 
servations  that  yield  new  facts  or  data  and  help  the  mind 
judge  more  accurately  the  relevancy  of  facts  already  at 
hand.  The  elaboration  of  the  hypothesis  docs  not  wait  until 
the  problem  has  been  defined  and  adequate  hypothesis  has 
been  arrived  at;  it  may  come  in  at  any  intermediate  time. 
And  as  we  have  just  seen,  any  particular  overt  test  need 
not  be  final;  it  may  be  introductory  to  new  observations 
and  new  suggestions,  according  to  what  happens  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  it. 

There  is,  however,  an  important  difference  between  test 
by  overt  action  in  practical  deliberations  and  in  scientific 
investigations.  In  the  former  the  practical  commitment  in¬ 
volved  in  overt  action  is  much  more  serious  than  in  the 
latter.  An  astronomer  or  a  chemist  performs  overt  actions, 
but  they  are  for  the  sake  of  knowledge ;  they  serve  to  test 
and  develop  his  conceptions  and  theories.  In  practical  mat¬ 
ters,  the  main  result  desired  lies  outside  of  knowledge.  One 
of  the  great  values  of  thinking,  accordingly,  is  that  it  defers 
the  commitment  to  action  that  is  irretrievable,  that,  once 
made,  cannot  be  revoked.  Even  in  moral  and  other  practi¬ 
cal  matters,  therefore,  a  thoughtful  person  treats  his  overt 
deeds  as  experimental  so  far  as  possible;  that  is  to  say, 


HOW  WE  THINK 


116 

while  he  cannot  call  them  back  and  must  stand  their  conae- 
quences,  he  gives  alert  attention  to  what  they  teach  him 
about  his  conduct  as  well  as  to  the  non-intellectual  con¬ 
sequences.  He  makes  a  problem  out  of  consequences  of 
conduct,  looking  into  the  causes  from  which  they  probably 
resulted,  especially  the  causes  that  lie  in  his  own  habits 
and  desires. 

In  conclusion,  we  point  out  that  the  five  phases  of  re¬ 
flection  that  have  been  described  represent  only  in  outline 
the  indispensable  traits  of  reflective  thinking.  In  practice, 
two  of  them  may  telescope,  some  of  them  may  be  passed 
over  hurriedly,  and  the  burden  of  reaching  a  conclusion 
may  fall  mainly  on  a  single  phase,  which  will  then  require 
a  seemingly  disproportionate  development.  No  set  rules  can 
be  laid  down  on  such  matters.  The  way  they  are  managed 
depends  upon  the  intellectual  tact  and  sensitiveness  of  the 
individual.  When  things  have  come  out  wrong,  it  is,  how¬ 
ever,  a  wise  practice  to  review  the  methods  by  which  the 
unwise  decision  was  reached,  and  see  where  the  misstep  was 
made. 


One  Phase  May  Be  Expanded 

In  complicated  cases  some  of  the  five  phases  are  so  exten¬ 
sive  that  they  include  definite  subphases  within  themselves. 
In  this  case  it  is  arbitrary  whether  the  minor  functions  are 
regarded  as  parts  or  are  listed  as  distinct  phases.  There  is 
nothing  especially  sacred  about  the  number  five.  Tor  ex¬ 
ample,  in  matters  of  practical  deliberation  where  the  object 
is  to  decide  what  to  do,  it  may  be  well  to  undertake  a  scru¬ 
tiny  of  the  underlying  desires  and  motives  that  are  operat¬ 
ing;  that  is,  instead  of  asking  what  ends  and  means  will  best 
satisfy  one's  wish,  one  may  turn  back  to  the  attitudes  of 
which  the  wish  is  the  expression.  It  is  a  matter  of  indifier- 
enoe  whether  this  search  be  listed  as  an  independent  prob- 


analysis  of  reflective  thinking  117 

lem,  having  its  own  phaaesj  oi  as  an  additional  phase  in  the 
original  problem. 

Reference  to  the  Future  and  to  the  Past 

Again,  it  has  been  suggested  that  reflective  thinking  in¬ 
volves  a  look  into  the  future,  a  forecast,  an  anticipation,  or 
a  prediction,  and  that  this  should  be  listed  as  a  sixth  as¬ 
pect,  or  phase.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  every  intellectual  sug¬ 
gestion  or  idea  is  anticipatory  of  some  possible  future  ex¬ 
perience,  while  the  final  solution  gives  a  definite  set  toward 
the  future.  It  is  both  a  record  of  something  accomplished 
and  an  assignment  of  a  future  method  of  operation.  It  helps 
set  up  an  enduring  habit  of  procedure.  When  a  physician,* 
for  example,  has  diagnosed  a  case,  he  usually  makes  also 
a  prognosis,  a  forecast,  of  the  probable  future  course  of  ths: 
disease.  And  not  only  is  his  treatment  a  verification  —  on 
the  reverse  —  of  the  idea  or  hypothesis  about  the  disease! 
upon  which  he  has  proceeded,  but  the  result  also  affects  his 
.  treatment  of  future  patients.  In  some  cases,  the  future  refer¬ 
ence  may  be  so  important  as  to  require  special  elaboration. 
In  this  case,  it  may  be  presented  as  an  added,  distinct  phase. 
Some  of  the  investigations  of  an  astronomical  expedition 
to  watch  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  may  be  directly  intended,  for 
example,  to  get  material  bearing  on  Einstein's  theory.  But 
the  theory,  itself,  is  so  important  that  its  confirmation  or 
refutation  will  give  a  decided  turn  to  the  future  of  physical 
science,  and  this  consideration  is  likely  to  be  uppermost  in 
the  minds  of  scientists. 

Of  equal  importance  is  the  reference  to  the  past  involved 
in  reflection.  Of  course,  suggestions  are  dependent  in  any 
case  upon  one’s  past  experience;  they  do  not  arise  out  of 
nothing.  But  while  sometimes  we  go  ahead  with  the  sug¬ 
gestion  without  stopping  to  go  back  to  the  original  experi¬ 
ence  of  which  it  is  the  fruit,  at  other  times  we  go  consciously 


118  HOW  WE  THINK 

over  the  past  experience  in  considerable  detail  as  part  of  the 
process  of  testing  the  value  of  the  suggestion, 

Por  example,  it  occurs  to  a  man  to  invest  in  real  estate, 
Then  he  recalls  that  a  previous  investment  of  this  kind 
turned  out  unfortunately.  He  goes  over  the  former  case, 
comparing  it  bit  by  bit  with  the  present,  to  see  how  far  the 
two  cases  are  alike  or  unlike.  Examination  of  the  past  may 
be  the  chief  and  decisive  factor  in  thought.  The  most  valu¬ 
able  reference  to  the  past  is  likely,  however,  to  come  at  the 
time  the  conclusion  is  reached.  We  noted  earlier  ^  the  im¬ 
portance  of  a  final  survey  to  secure  a  net  formulation  of  the 
exact  result  and  of  the  premises  upon  which  it  logically  de¬ 
pends,  This  is  not  only  an  important  part  of  the  process  of 
testing,  but,  as  was  stated  in  the  earlier  discussion,  is  al¬ 
most  necessary  if  good  habits  are  to  be  built  up.  Ability  to 
organize  knowledge  consists  very  largely  in  the  habit  of 
reviewing  previous  facts  and  ideas  and  relating  them  to  one 
another  on  a  new  basis;  namely,  that  of  the  conclusion 
that  has  been  reached.  A  certain  amount  of  this  operation 
is  included  in  the  testing  phase  that  has  been  described. 
But  its  influence  upon  the  attitude  of  students  is  so  im¬ 
portant  that  it  may  be  well  at  times  so  to  emphasize  it  that 
it  becomes  a  definite  function,  or  phase,  on  its  own  account. 

*  See  page  75, 


CHAPTER  EIGHT 


THE  PLACE  OF  JUDGMENT  IN 
REFLECTIVE  ACTIVITY 


I.  Thbeb  Factors  in  Judging 

We  have  been  dealing  so  far  with  the  act  of  reflection 
as  an  entirety.  There  are  subordinate  unities  within  the 
process  upon  whose  character  the  efficiency  of  the  whole 
undertaking  depends. 

Judgments,  the  Constituent  Units  of  Thought 

From  one  point  of  view  the  whole  process  of  thinking  con¬ 
sists  of  making  a  series  of  judgments  that  are  so  related  as 
to  support  one  another  in  leading  to  a  final  judgment  —  the 
conclusion.  In  spite  of  this  fact,  we  have  treated  reflective 
activity  as  a  whole,  first,  because  judgments  do  not  occur 
in  isolation  but  in  connection  with  the  solution  of  a  prob¬ 
lem,  the  clearing  away  of  something  obscure  and  perplexing, 
the  resolution  of  a  difiiculty ;  in  short,  as  units  in  reflective 
activity.  The  purpose  of  solving  a  problem  determines  what 
kind  of  judgments  should  be  made.  If  I  were  suddenly  to 
announce  that  it  would  take  twenty-two  and  a  half  yards 
of  carpet  to  cover  a  certain  floor,  it  might  be  a  perfectly 
correct  statement,  but  as  a  jvdgment  it  would  be  senseless 
if  it  did  not  bear  upon  some  question  that  had  come  up. 
Judgments  need  to  be  relevant  to  an  issue  as  well  as  cor¬ 
rect.  Judging  is  the  act  of  selecting  and  weighing  the  bear¬ 
ing  of  facts  and  suggestions  as  they  present  themselves,  as 
well  as  of  deciding  whether  the  alleged  facta  are  really 


HOW  WE  THINK 


120 

facts  and  whether  the  idea  used  is  a  sound  idea  or  merely 
a  fancy.  We  may  eny,  for  short,  that  a  person  of  sound  judg¬ 
ment  is  one  who,  in  the  idiomatic  phrase,  has  '  horse  sense’; 
he  is  a  good  judge  of  relative  values;  he  can  estimate,  ap¬ 
praise,  evaluate,  with  tact  and  discernment. 

It  follows  that  the  heart  of  a  good  habit  of  thought  lies 
in  the  power  to  pass  judgments  pertinently  and  discrimi¬ 
natingly.  We  sometimes  meet  men  with  little  schooling 
whose  advice  is  greatly  relied  upon  and  who  are  spontane¬ 
ously  looked  to  when  an  emergency  arises,  men  who  are 
conspicuously  successful  in  conducting  vital  affairs.  They 
are  the  persons  of  sound  judgment.  A  man  of  sound  judg¬ 
ment  in  any  set  of  affairs  is  an  educated  man  as  respeota 
those  affairs,  whatever  his  schooling  or  academic  standing. 
And  if  our  schools  turn  out  their  pupils  in  that  attitude  of 
mind  which  is  conducive  to  good  judgment  in  any  depart¬ 
ment  of  affairs  in  which  the  pupils  are  placed,  they  have 
done  more  than  if  they  sent  out  their  pupils  possessed 
merely  of  vast  stores  of  information  or  high  degrees  of  skill 
in  specialized  branches. 

The  Features  of  Judgment 

The  significant  traits  of  judgment  may  be  gathered  from 
a  consideration  of  the  operations  to  which  the  word  judg¬ 
ment  was  originally  applied ;  namely,  the  authoritative  de¬ 
cision  of  matters  in  a  legal  controversy  —  the  procedure 
of  the  judge  on  the  bench.  There  are  three  such  features; 
(1)  a  controversy,  consisting  of  opposite  claims  regarding 
the  same  objective  situation;  (2)  a  process  of  defining  and 
elaborating  these  claims  and  of  sifting  the  facts  adduced  to 
support  them;  (3)  a  final  decision,  or  sentence,  closing  the 
particular  matter  in  dispute  while  also  serving  as  a  rule  or 
principle  for  deciding  future  cases. 


THE  PLACE  OF  JUDGMENT 


121 


It  Arises  from  Doubt  and  Controversy 

1.  Unless  there  is  something  doubtful,  the  situation  is 
read  off  at  a  glance;  it  is  taken  in  on  sight;  i.e.,  there  is 
merely  perception,  recognition,  not  judgment.  If  the  mat¬ 
ter  is  wholly  doubtful,  if  it  is  dark  and  obscure  throughout, 
there  is  a  blind  mystery  and  again  no  judgment  occurs.  But 
if  it  suggests,  however  vaguely,  different  meanings,  rival 
possible  interpretations,  there  is  some  'point  at  issue,  some 
matter  at  stake.  Doubt  takes  the  form  of  discussion,  of 
controversy  within  the  mind.  Different  sides  compete  for 
a  conclusion  in  their  favor.  Cases  brought  to  trial  before  a 
judge  illustrate  neatly  and  unambiguously  this  strife  of 
alternative  interpretations ;  but  any  attempt  to  clear  up  in¬ 
tellectually  a  doubtful  situation  exemplifies  the  same  traits. 
A  moving  blur  catches  our  eye  in  the  distance;  we  ask  our¬ 
selves:  "  What  is  it?  Is  it  a  cloud  of  whirling  dust?  a  tree 
waving  its  branches?  a  man  signaling  to  us?  ”  Something 
in  the  total  situation  suggests  each  of  these  possible  mean¬ 
ings.  Only  one  of  them  can  possibly  be  correct;  perhaps 
none  of  them  is  appropriate;  yet  some  meaning  the  thing  in 
question  surely  has.  Which  of  the  alternative  suggested 
meanings  has  the  rightful  claim?  What  does  the  perception 
really  mean?  How  is  it  to  be  interpreted,  estimated,  ap¬ 
praised,  placed?  Every  judgment  proceeds  from  some  such 
situation. 

It  Defines  the  Issue  by  Selecting  Evidential  Facts  and 
Appropriate  Principles 

2.  The  hearing  of  the  controversy,  the  trial,  the  weighing 
of  alternative  claims,  divides  into  two  branches,  either  of 
which,  in  a  given  case,  may  be  more  conspicuous  than  the 
other.  In  the  consideration  of  a  legal  dispute  these  two 
branches  are  sifting  the  evidence  and  selecting  the  rules 


122  HOW  WE  THINK 

that  are  applicable ;  they  are  ‘  the  facts  ’  and  '  the  law  ’ 
of  the  case.  In  ordinary  judgment  they  are  (o)  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  the  data  that  are  important  in  the  given  case, 
and  (b)  the  elaboration  of  the  conceptions  or  meanings  sug¬ 
gested  by  the  crude  data.^  They  are  concerned  with  the  two 
questions;  (a)  What  portions  or  aspects  of  the  situation 
are  significant  in  controlling  the  formation  of  the  interpre¬ 
tation?  (h)  Just  what  is  the  full  meaning  and  bearing  of 
the  idea  used  as  a  method  of  interpretation?  These  questions 
are  strictly  correlative;  the  answer  to  each  depends  upon 
the  answer  to  the  other.  We  may,  however,  for  convenience, 
consider  them  separately. 

a.  Selecting  the  Facts.  In  every  actual  occurrence  there 
are  many  details  that  are  part  of  the  total  occurrence,  but 
nevertheless  are  not  significant  in  relation  to  the  point 
at  issue.  All  parts  of  an  experience  are  equally  present,  but 
they  are  very  far  from  being  equally  valuable  as  signs  or 
as  evidences.  Nor  is  there  any  tag,  or  label,  on  any  trait 
saying;  “This  is  important”  or  “This  is  trivial.”  Nor  is 
intensity,  or  vividness,  or  conspicuousness  a  safe  measure 
of  indicative  and  proving  value.  The  glaring  thing  may  be 
totally  insignificant  in  this  particular  situation,  and  the 
key  to  the  understanding  of  the  whole  matter  may  be 
modest  or  hidden.  Features  that  are  not  significant  are  dis¬ 
tracting  ;  they  insist  upon  their  claim  to  be  regarded  as  clews 
and  cues  to  interpretation,  while  traits  that  are  really 
significant  do  not  appear  on  the  surface  at  all.  Hence, 
judgment  is  required  even  in  reference  to  the  situation  or 
event  that  is  present  to  the  senses;  elimination  or  rejection, 
selection,  discovery,  or  bringing  to  light  must  take  place. 
Till  we  have  reached  a  final  conclusion,  rejection  and  selec¬ 
tion  must  be  tentative  or  conditional.  We  select  the  things 

1  Compare  the  fourth  function  in  the  analyaia  made  in  Chap¬ 
ter  VII, 


the  place  op  judgment  123 

that  we  hope  or  trust  are  cues  to  meaning.  But  if  they  do 
not  suggest  a  situation  that  accepts  and  includes  them,  we 
reconstitute  our  data,  the  facta  of  the  case;  for  we  mean, 
intellectually,  by  the  facts  of  the  case  those  traits  that  are 
used  as  evidence  in  reaching  a  conclusion  or  forming  a 
decision. 

No  hard  and  fast  rules  for  this  operation  of  selecting  and 
rejecting,  or  fixing  upon  significant  evidential  facts,  can  be 
given.  It  all  comes  back,  as  we  say,  to  the  good  judgment, 
the  good  sense,  of  the  one  judging.  To  be  a  good  judge  is 
to  have  a  sense  of  the  relative  indicative  or  signifying  values 
of  the  various  features  of  the  perplexing  situation;  to  know 
what  to  let  go  as  of  no  account;  what  to  eliminate  as  irrele¬ 
vant;  what  to  retain  as  conducive  to  the  outcome;  what  to 
emphasize  as  a  clew  to  the  difficulty.  This  power  in  ordi¬ 
nary  matters  we  call  knack,  tact,  cleverness;  in  more  im¬ 
portant  affairs,  insight,  discernment.  In  part  it  is  instinc¬ 
tive  or  inborn,  but  it  also  represents  the  funded  outcome  of 
long  familiarity  with  like  operations  in  the  past.  Posses¬ 
sion  of  this  ability  to  seize  what  is  evidential  or  significant 
and  to  let  the  rest  go  is  the  mark  of  the  expert,  the  con¬ 
noisseur,  the  judge,  in  any  matter. 

Mill  cites  the  following  case,  which  is  worth  noting  as 
an  instance  of  the  extreme  delicacy  and  accuracy  to  which 
may  be  developed  this  power  of  sizing  up  the  significant 
factors  of  a  situation. 

A  Scotch  manufacturer  procured  from  England,  at  a  high 
rate  of  wages,  a  working  dyer,  famous  for  producing  very 
fine  colors,  with  the  view  of  teaching  to  his  other  workmen 
the  same  skill.  The  workman  came;  but  his  method  of  pro¬ 
portioning  the  ingredients,  in  which  lay  the  secret  of  the 
effects  he  produced,  was  by  taking  them  up  in  handfuls,  while 
the  common  method  was  to  weigh  them.  The  manufacturer 
sought  to  make  him  turn  his  handling  system  into  an  equiva¬ 
lent  weighing  system,  that  the  general  principles  of  his  pecul- 


124  HOW  WE  THINK 

iar  mode  of  proceeding  might  be  ascertained.  This,  however, 
the  man  found  himself  quite  unable  to  do,  and  could  there¬ 
fore  impart  his  own  skill  to  nobody.  He  had,  from  individual 
oases  of  his  own  experience,  established  a  connection  in  his 
mind  between  fine  effects  of  color  and  tactual  perceptions  in 
handling  his  dyeing  materials;  and  from  these  perceptions  he 
could,  in  any  particular  case,  infer  the  means  to  be  em'ployed 
and  the  effects  which  would  be  produced. 

Long  brooding  over  conditions,  intimate  contact  asso¬ 
ciated  with  keen  interest,  thorough  absorption  in  a  multi¬ 
plicity  of  allied  experiences,  tend  to  bring  about  those  judg¬ 
ments  which  we  then  call  '  intuitive  ’ ;  but  they  are  true 
judgments,  because  they  are  based  on  intelligent  selection 
and  estimation,  with  solution  of  a  problem  as  the  con¬ 
trolling  standard.  Possession  of  this  capacity  makes  the 
difference  between  the  artist  and  the  intellectual  bungler. 

Such  is  ability  to  judge  in  its  completest  form,  But  in 
any  case  there  is  a  certain  feeling  after  the  way  to  be  fol¬ 
lowed;  a  tentative  picking  out  of  certain  qualities  to  see 
what  emphasis  upon  them  would  lead  to ;  a  willingness  to 
hold  final  appraisal  in  suspense;  willingness  to  reject  the 
factors  entirely  or  relegate  them  to  a  different  position  in 
the  evidential  scheme  if  other  features  yield  more  solvent 
suggestions.  Alertness,  flexibility,  curiosity,  are  the  essen¬ 
tials;  dogmatism,  rigidity,  prejudice,  caprice,  arising  from 
routine,  passion,  and  flippancy,  are  fatal. 

b.  Selecting  the  Principles.  This  selection  of  data  is,  of 
course,  for  the  sake  of  controlling  the  development  and  elab¬ 
oration  of  the  suggested  meaning  in  the  light  of  which  they 
are  to  he  interpreted.^  Evolution  of  conceptions  thus  goes 
on  simultaneously  with  determination  of  the  facts ;  one  pos¬ 
sible  meaning  after  another  is  held  before  the  mind,  con¬ 
sidered  in  relation  to  the  data  to  which  it  is  applied,  is 
*  Of.  pages  104  and  109. 


the  place  of  judgment  125 

developed  into  its  more  detailed  bearings,  is  dropped  or 
tentatively  accepted  and  used.  We  do  not  approach  any 
problem  with  a  wholly  naive  or  virgin  mind;  we  approach  it 
with  certain  acquired  habitual  modes  of  understanding, 
with  a  certain  store  of  previously  evolved  meanings  or  at 
least  of  experiences  from  which  meanings  may  be  educed. 

If  a  habit  is  checked,  and  so  inhibited  from  easy  appli¬ 
cation,  a  possible  meaning  for  the  facts  in  question  comes 
to  the  mind.  No  hard  and  fast  rules  decide  whether  a 
meaning  suggested  is  the  right  and  proper  meaning  to  follow 
up.  The  individual's  own  good  (or  bad)  judgment  is  the 
guide.  There  is  no  label,  on  any  given  idea  or  principle, 
that  says  automatically,  “  Use  me  in  this  situation  "  —  as 
the  magic  cakes  of  Alice  in  Wonderland  were  inscribed  “  Eat 
me.”  The  thinker  has  to  decide,  to  choose;  and  there  is 
always  a  risk,  so  that  the  prudent  thinker  selects  warily  — 
subject,  that  is,  to  confirmation  or  frustration  by  later 
events.  If  one  is  not  able  to  estimate  wisely  what  is  rele¬ 
vant  to  the  interpretation  of  a  given  perplexing  or  doubtful 
issue,  it  avails  little  that  arduous  learning  has  built  up  a 
large  stock  of  concepts.  For  learning  is  not  wisdom;  in¬ 
formation  does  not  guarantee  good  judgment.  Memory 
may  provide  a  refrigerator  in  which  to  store  a  stock  of 
meanings  for  future  use,  but  judgment  selects  and  adopts 
the  one  to  be  used  in  an  emergency  —  and  without  an  emer¬ 
gency  (some  crisis,  slight  or  great)  there  is  no  call  for  judg¬ 
ment.  No  conception,  even  if  it  is  carefully  and  firmly 
established  in  the  abstract,  can  at  first  safely  be  more  than 
a  candidate  for  the  office  of  interpreter.  Only  greater  suc¬ 
cess  than  that  of  its  rivals  in  clarifying  dark  spots,  untying 
hard  knots,  reconciling  discrepancies,  can  elect  it  and  prove 
it  to  be  a  valid  idea  for  the  given  situation.  In  short,  think¬ 
ing  is  a  continual  appraising  of  both  data  and  ideas.  Unless 
the  pertinence  and  force  of  each  seemingly  evidential  fact 


126  HOW  WE  THINK 

and  seemingly  explanatory  idea  is  judged,  appraised,  the 
mind  goes  on  a  wild-goose  chase. 

It  Terminates  in  a  Decision 

3.  The  judgment  when  formed  is  a  decision;  it  closes,  or 
concludes,  the  question  at  issue.  This  determination  not 
only  settles  that  particular  case,  but  it  also  helps  fix  a  rule 
or  method  for  deciding  similar  matters  in  the  future;  as 
the  sentence  of  the  judge  on  the  bench  both  terminates  that 
dispute  and  also  forms  a  precedent  for  future  decisions.  If 
the  interpretation  settled  upon  is  not  controverted  by  sub¬ 
sequent  events,  a  presumption  is  built  up  in  favor  of  similar 
interpretation  in  other  cases  where  the  features  are  not 
so  obviously  unlike  as  to  make  it  inappropriate.  In  this  way, 
principles  of  judging  are  gradually  built  up ;  a  certain  man¬ 
ner  of  interpretation  gets  weight,  authority.  In  short,  mean¬ 
ings  get  standardized;  they  become  logical  concepts.® 


II.  Analysis  and  Synthesis;  The  Two  Functions 
OF  Judgment 

Through  judging,  confused  data  are  cleared  up,  and  seem¬ 
ingly  incoherent  and  disconnected  facts  are  brought  to¬ 
gether.  The  clearing  up  is  analysis.  The  bringing  together, 
or  unifying,  is  synthesis.  Things  may  have  a  peculiar  feeling 
for  us;  they  may  make  a  certain  indescribable  impression 
upon  us;  the  thing  may  jeel  round  (that  is,  present  a  quality 
which  we  afterwards  define  as  '  round  ’) ;  an  act  may  seem 
rude;  yet  this  impression,  this  quality,  may  be  lost,  ab¬ 
sorbed,  blended  in  the  total  situation.  Only  as  we  need  to 
use  just  that  aspect  of  the  original  situation  as  a  tool  of 
grasping  something  perplexing  or  obscure  in  another  situa- 


See  page  160. 


the  place  of  judgment  127 

tion,  do  we  detach  the  quality  so  that  it  becomes  individu¬ 
alized.  Only  because  we  need  to  characterize  the  shape  of 
some  new  object  or  the  moral  quality  of  some  new  act,  does 
the  element  of  roundness  or  rudeness  in  the  old  experience 
detach  itself  and  so  stand  out  as  a  distinctive  feature.  If 
the  element  thus  selected  clears  up  what  is  otherwise  ob¬ 
scure  in  the  new  experience,  if  it  settles  what  is  uncertain,  it 
thereby  gains  in  positiveness  and  definiteness  of  meaning. 
This  point  will  meet  ua  again  in  the  following  chapter; 
here  we  speak  of  the  matter  only  as  it  bears  upon  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  analysis  and  synthesis. 

Mental  Analysis  Is  Not  like  Physical  Division 

Even  when  it  is  definitely  stated  that  intellectual  and 
physical  analyses  are  different  sorts  of  operations,  intellec¬ 
tual  analysis  is  often  treated  after  the  analogy  of  physical, 
as  if  it  were  the  breaking  up  of  a  whole  into  all  its  con¬ 
stituent  parts  in  the  mind  instead  of  in  space.  As  nobody 
can  possibly  tell  what  breaking  a  whole  into  its  parts  in 
the  mind  means,  this  conception  leads  to  the  further  notion 
that  logical  analysis  is  a  mere  enumeration  and  listing  of 
all  conceivable  qualities  and  relations.  The  influence  upon 
education  of  this  conception  has  been  very  great.^  Every 
subject  in  the  curriculum  has  passed  through  —  or  still 
remains  in  —  what  may  be  called  the  phase  of  ‘  anatomical  ’ 
or  ‘  morphological  ’  method:  the  stage  in  which  understand¬ 
ing  the  subject  is  thought  to  consist  of  multiplying  distinc¬ 
tions  of  quality,  form,  relation,  and  so  on,  and  attaching 
some  name  to  each  distinguished  element.  In  normal  growth, 
specific  properties  are  emphasized  and  so  individualized 
only  when  they  serve  to  clear  up  a  present  difficulty.  Only 

*  Thus  arise  all  those  falsely  aiial3rtic  methods  in  geography,  read¬ 
ing,  writing,  drawing,  botany,  arithmetic,  which  We  have  already  con¬ 
sidered  in  another  connection.  (See  page  80.) 


HOW  WE  THINK 


128 

as  they  are  involved  in  judging  some  specific  situation  is 
there  any  motive  or  use  for  analyses,  for  emphasis  upon 
some  element  or  relation  as  peculiarly  significant. 

The  same  putting  the  cart  before  the  horse,  the  product 
before  the  process,  is  found  in  that  overconsoious  formula¬ 
tion  of  methods  of  procedure  so  current  in  elementary  in¬ 
struction.  The  method  that  is  employed  in  discovery,  in 
reflective  inquiry,  cannot  possibly  be  identified  ■with  the 
method  that  emerges  after  the  discovery  is  made.®  In  the 
genuine  operation  of  inference,  the  mind  is  in  the  attitude 
of  search,  of  hunting,  of  ‘projection,  of  tr'ping  this  and  that; 
when  the  conclusion  is  reached,  the  search  is  at  an  end.  The 
Greeks  used  to  discuss:  “How  is  learning  (or  inquiry) 
possible?  For  either  we  know  already  what  we  are  after, 
and  then  we  do  not  learn  or  inquire;  or  we  do  not  know, 
and  then  we  cannot  inquire,  for  we  do  not  know  what  to 
look  for.”  The  dilemma  is  at  least  suggestive,  for  it  points 
to  the  true  alternative:  the  use  in  inquiry  of  doubt,  of  ten¬ 
tative  suggestion,  of  experimentation.  After  we  have  reached 
the  conclusion,  a  reconsideration  of  the  steps  of  the  process 
to  see  what  is  helpful,  what  is  harmful,  what  is  merely  use¬ 
less,  assists  in  dealing  more  promptly  and  efficaciously  with 
analogous  problems  in  the  future.  In  this  way  the  method  of 
organiiing  thought  is  built  up.” 

Conscious  Method  and  Unconscious  Logical  Attitude 

The  common  assumption  that,  unless  the  pupil  from  the 
outset  consciously  recognizes  and  explicitly  states  the 
method  logically  implied  in  the  result  he  is  to  reach,  he 
will  have  no  method  and  his  mind  will  work  confusedly 
or  anarchically  is  fallacious.  It  is  equally  erroneous  to  be- 

®  See  page  74. 

“  Compare  the  discussion  (pages  77-79)  of  the  psychological  and 
the  logical. 


the  place  of  judgment  129 

lievethat,  if  he  accompanies  his  performance  with  conscious 
etatement  of  some  form  of  procedure  (outline,  topical 
analysis,  list  of  headings  and  subheadings,  uniform  formula) , 
his  mind  is  safeguarded  and  strengthened.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  gradual,  largely  unconscious,  development  of  logical 
attitude  and  habit  comes  first.  A  conscious  setting  forth  of 
the  method  logically  adapted  for  reaching  an  end  is  possible 
only  after  the  result  has  first  been  reached  by  unconscious 
and  tentative  methods.  Such  conscious  setting  forth  of  the 
method  is  valuable  when  a  review  of  the  method  that 
achieved  success  in  a  given  case  will  throw  light  upon  a  new 
similar  case.  The  ability  to  fasten  upon  and  single  out 
(abstract,  analyze)  those  features  of  one  experience  that  are 
logically  best  is  hindered  by  premature  insistence  upon 
their  explicit  formulation.  Repeated  use  is  what  gives  a 
method  definiteness;  given  this  definiteness,  precipitation 
into  formulated  statement  should  follow  naturally.  But 
because  teachers  find  that  the  things  that  they  themselves 
best  understand  are  marked  off  and  defined  in  clear-cut 
ways,  our  schoolrooms  are  pervaded  with  the  superstition 
that  children  are  to  begin  with  crystallized  formulas  of 
method. 

As  analysis  is  conceived  to  be  a  sort  of  picking  to  pieces, 
so  synthesis  is  thought  to  be  a  sort  of  physical  piecing  to¬ 
gether.  When  it  is  so  imagined,  it  too  becomes  a  mystery. 
In  fact,  synthesis  takes  place  wherever  we  grasp  the  bear¬ 
ing  of  facts  on  a  conclusion  or  of  a  principle  on  facts.  As 
analysis  is  emphasis,  so  synthesis  is  placing;  the  one  causes 
the  emphasized  fact  or  property  to  stand  out  as  significant; 
the  other  puts  what  is  selected  in  its  context,  its  connection 
with  what  is  signified.  It  unites  it  with  some  other  meaning 
to  give  both  increased  significance.  When  quicksilver  was 
linked  to  iron,  tin,  etc.,  as  a  metal,  all  these  objects  obtained 
new  intellectual  value.  Every  judgment  is  analytic  in  so  far 


HOW  WE  THINK 


130 

as  it  involves  discernment,  discrimination,  marking  off  the 
trivial  from  the  important,  the  irrelevant  from  what  points 
to  a  conclusion;  and  it  is  synthetic  in  so  far  as  it  leaves  the 
mind  with  an  inclusive  situation  within  which  selected 
facts  are  placed. 

Analysis  and  Synthesis  in  Educational  Procedure 

Educational  methods  that  pride  themselves  on  being  ex¬ 
clusively  analytic  or  exclusively  synthetic  are  (so  far  as 
they  carry  out  their  boasts)  incompatible  with  normal 
operations  of  judgment.  Discussions  have  taken  place,  for 
example,  as  to  whether  the  teaching  of  geography  should 
be  analytic  or  synthetic.  The  synthetic  method  is  supposed 
to  begin  with  the  partial,  limited  portion  of  the  earth’s  sur¬ 
face  already  familiar  to  the  pupil,  and  then  gradually  piece 
on  adjacent  regions  (the  county,  the  country,  the  continent, 
and  so  on)  till  an  idea  of  the  entire  globe  is  reached,  or  of 
the  solar  system  that  includes  the  globe,  The  analytic  method 
is  supposed  to  begin  with  the  physical  whole,  the  solar  sys¬ 
tem  or  globe,  and  to  work  down  through  its  constituent 
portions  till  the  immediate  environment  is  reached.  The 
underlying  conceptions  here  deal  with  physical  wholes  and 
physical  parts.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  cannot  assume  that 
the  portion  of  the  earth  already  familiar  to  the  child  is 
such  a  definite  object,  mentally,  that  he  can  safely  start  with 
and  from  his  present  idea  of  it.  His  knowledge  of  it  is  misty 
and  vague  as  well  as  incomplete.  Accordingly,  mental  prog¬ 
ress  will  involve  analysis  of  it  —  emphasis  of  features  that 
are  significant  till  they  will  stand  out  clearly.  Moreover,  his 
own  locality  is  not  sharply  marked  off,  neatly  bounded,  and 
measured.  His  experience  of  it  is  already  an  experience  that 
involves  sun,  moon,  and  stars  as  parts  of  the  scene  he  sur¬ 
veys;  it  involves  a  changing  horizon  line  as  he  moves  about. 
In  short,  even  his  more  limited  and  local  experience  involves 


the  place  op  judgment  13], 

far-reaching  factors  that  take  hia  imagination  out  beyond 
his  o'wn  street  and  village.  Connection,  relationship  with  a 
larger  whole,  is  already  involved,  But  understanding  of 
these  relations  is  inadequate,  vague,  incorrect.  He  needs  to 
define  the  features  of  the  local  environment  in  order  to 
clarify  and  enlarge  his  conceptions  of  the  larger  geographi¬ 
cal  scene  to  which  they  belong.  At  the  same  time,  not  till  he 
has  grasped  the  larger  scene  will  many  of  even  the  com¬ 
monest  features  of  his  local  environment  become  intelligible. 
Analysis  leads  to  synthesis,  while  synthesis  perfects  analy¬ 
sis.  As  the  pupil  grows  in  comprehension  of  the  vast  com¬ 
plicated  earth  in  its  setting  in  space,  he  also  sees  more 
definitely  the  meaning  of  familiar  local  details.  This  inti¬ 
mate  interaction  between  selective  emphasis  and  interpre¬ 
tation  through  a  context  of  what  is  selected  is  found  wher¬ 
ever  reflection  proceeds  normally.  Hence  the  folly  of  trying 
to  set  analysis  and  synthesis  over  against  each  other. 

Whenever  we  appraise,  we  both  select  and  emphasize  a 
particular  quality  or  feature,  and  we  link  together  things 
that,  from  an  intellectual  point  of  view,  were  previously 
separate.  In  appraising  the  value  of  land,  the  appraiser 
not  only  causes  its  monetary  property  to  stand  out,  but  he 
also  places  it  in  a  scale  of  the  land  values  of  the  whole 
community.  Something  of  this  sort  happens  in  all  judgment. 


OHAPTEE  NINE 


UNDERSTANDING:  IDEAS  AND 
MEANINGS 


I.  Ideas  as  Suggestions  and  Conjectures 

We  see  something  moving,  hear  a  sound  unexpectedly, 
smell  an  unusual  odor,  and  we  ask:  What  is  it?  What  does 
what  we  see,  hear,  smell,  mean?  When  we  have  found  out 
what  it  signifies,  a  squirrel  running,  two  persons  conversing, 
an  explosion  of  gunpowder,  we  say  that  we  understand.  To 
understand  is  to  grasp  meaning.  Until  we  understand,  we 
are,  if  we  have  curiosity,  troubled,  bafHed,  and  hence  moved 
to-  inquire.  After  we  understand,  we  are,  comparatively  at 
least,  intellectually  at  home.  There  is  a  time  during  our 
investigation  when  meaning  is  only  suggested;  when  we 
hold  it  in  suspense  as  a  possibility  rather  than  accept  it  as 
an  actuality.  Then  the  meaning  is  an  idea.  An  idea  thus 
stands  midway  between  assured  understanding  and  mental 
confusion  and  bafflement.  While  a  meaning  is  conditionally 
accepted,  accepted  for  use  and  trial,  it  is  an  idea,  a  sup- 
posal.  When  it  is  positively  accepted,  some  object  or  event 
is  understood. 

Ideas  Are  Elements  in  Judgments,  Tools  of  Interpretation 

An  idea  is  thus  not  a  unity  like  judgment,  but  rather  a 
unit  element  in  forming  a  judgment.  We  may  compare  a 
complete  reflection  to  a  paragraph;  then  the  judgment  is 
like  a  sentence  in  the  structure  of  the  paragraph,  and  an 
idea  is  like  a  word  in  the  sentence.  That  ideas  are  necessary 


IDEAS  AND  meanings  133 

constituents  of  inference,  we  have  already  seen.  Positive 
inference  can  be  deferred  and  kept  in  process  of  develop¬ 
ment  and  teat  only  while  a  meaning  is  not  asserted  and  be¬ 
lieved  in.  Moreover,  ideas  are  indispensable  to  inference  be¬ 
cause  they  direct  observations  and  regulate  the  collection  and 
inspection  of  data.  Without  a  guiding  idea,  facts  would  be 
heaped  up  like  grains  of  sand;  they  would  not  be  organized 
into  intellectual  unity.  In  discussing  ideas  we  are  not, 
accordingly,  introducing  a  new  topic,  but  are,  as  in  the 
discussion  of  judgment,  going  into  detail  regarding  an 
element  in  the  whole  already  considered. 

Let  us  take  the  instance  of  a  blur  in  motion  at  a  distance. 
We  wonder  what  the  thing  is;  that  is,  what  the  blur  means. 
A  man  waving  his  arms,  a  friend  beckoning  to  us,  are  sug¬ 
gested  as  possibilities.  To  accept  at  once  either  alternative 
is  to  arrest  judgment.  But  if  we  treat  what  is  suggested  as 
only  a  suggestion,  a  supposition,  a  possibility,  it  becomes 
an  idea,  having  the  following  traits:  (a)  As  merely  a  sug¬ 
gestion,  it  is  a  conjecture,  a  guess,  which  in  cases  of  greater 
dignity  we  call  a  ‘  hypothesis  ’  or  a  '  theory.’  That  is  to  say, 
it  is  a  possible,  but  as  yet  doubtful,  mode  of  interpretation. 
(b)  Even  though  doubtful,  it  has  an  office  to  perforni; 
namely,  that  of  directing  inquiry  and  examination.  If  this 
blur  means  a  friend  beckoning,  then  careful  observation 
should  show  certain  other  traits.  If  it  is  a  man  driving  un¬ 
ruly  cattle,  certain  other  traits  should  be  found.  Let  us  look 
and  see  if  these  traits  are  found.  Taken  merely  as  a  doubt, 
an  idea  would  paralyze  inquiry.  Taken  merely  as  a  cer¬ 
tainty,  it  would  arrest  inquiry.  Taken  as  a  doubtful  possi¬ 
bility,  it  affords  a  standpoint,  a  platform,  a  method  of 
inquiry. 

Ideas,  then,  are  not  genuine  ideas  unless  they  are  tools 
with  which  to  search  for  material  to  solve  a  problem.  Sup¬ 
pose  it  is  desired  that  the  pupil  grasp  the  idea  of  the  spheric- 


HOW  WE  THINK 


134 

ity  of  the  earth.  This  is  different  from  teaching  him  ita 
sphericity  as  a  jact.  He  may  be  shown  (or  reminded  of)  a 
ball  or  a  globe  and  be  told  that  the  earth  is  round  like  those 
things;  he  may  then  be  made  to  repeat  that  statement  day 
after  day  till  the  shape  of  the  earth  and  the  shape  of  the 
ball  are  welded  together  in  his  mind.  But  he  has  not  thereby 
acquired  an  idea  of  the  earth's  sphericity;  at  most,  he  has 
had  a  certain  image  of  a  sphere  and  has  finally  managed  to 
image  the  earth  after  the  analogy  of  his  ball  image.  To 
grasp  '  sphericity  ’  as  an  idea,  the  pupil  must  first  have 
realized  certain  confusing  features  in  observed  facts  and 
have  had  the  idea  of  spherical  shape  suggested  to  him  as  a 
possible  way  of  accounting  for  such  phenomena  as  tops  of 
masts  being  seen  at  sea  after  the  hulls  have  disappeared, 
the  shape  of  shadows  of  the  earth  in  an  eclipse,  etc. 
Only  by  use  as  a  method  of  interpreting  data  so  as  to 
give  them  fuller  meaning  does  sphericity  become  a  genuine 
idea.  There  may  be  a  vivid  image  and  no  idea ;  or  there 
may  be  a  fleeting,  obscure  image  and  yet  an  idea,  if  that 
image  performs  the  function  of  instigating  and  directing  the 
observation  and  relation  of  facts. 

Logical  ideas  are  like  keys  that  are  shaped  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  opening  a  lock,  Pike,  separated  by  a  glass  partition 
from  the  fish  upon  which  they  ordinarily  prey,  will  —  so  it 
is  said  ■ —  butt  their  heads  against  the  glass  until  it  is  liter¬ 
ally  beaten  into  them  that  they  cannot  get  at  their  food. 
Animals  learn  (when  they  learn  at  all)  by  a  '  cut-and-try ' 
method,  by  doing  at  random  first  one  thing  then  another 
thing  and  continuing  the  things  that  happen  to  succeed. 
This  procedure  is  followed  by  human  beings  when  they  do 
not  operate  on  the  basis  of  ideas,  when  they  ‘  monkey,’  to 
use  a  term  derived  from  the  random  activity  of  one  of  the 
most  intelligent  of  the  lower  animals.  Action  directed  con¬ 
sciously  by  ideas  —  by  suggested  meanings  accepted  for 


IDEAS  AND  MEANINGS  136 

the  sake  of  experimenting  with  them  —  is  the  sole  alterna¬ 
tive  both  to  bull-headed  stupidity  and  to  learning  bought 
from  that  dear  teacher  —  chance  experience. 

It  is  significant  that  many  words  for  intelligence  sug¬ 
gest  the  idea  of  circuitous,  evasive  activity  —  often  with  a 
sort  of  intimation  of  even  moral  obliquity.  The  bluff,  hearty 
man  goes  straight  (and  stupidly,  it  is  implied)  at  some  work. 
The  intelligent  man  is  cunning,  shrewd  (crooked),  wily, 
subtle,  crafty,  artful,  designing  —  the  idea  of  indirection  is 
involved.’-  An  idea  is  a  method  of  evading,  circumventing, 
or  surmounting  through  reflection  obstacles  that  otherwise 
would  have  to  be  attacked  by  brute  force.  But  ideas  may 
lose  their  intellectual  quality  because  of  habitual  use. 
When  a  child  was  first  learning  to  recognize,  in  some  hesi¬ 
tating  suspense,  cats,  dogs,  houses,  marbles,  trees,  shoes, 
and  other  objects,  ideas  —  conscious  and  tentative  mean¬ 
ings —  intervened  as  methods  of  identification.  Now,  as  a 
rule,  the  thing  and  the  meaning  are  so  completely  fused 
that  there  is  no  idea  proper,  but  only  automatic  recogni¬ 
tion.  On  the  other  hand,  things  which  are  so  familiar,  so 
known  already,  that  they  are  recognized  without  an  inter¬ 
vening  idea  may  appear  in  an  unusual  context  and  give  rise 
to  a  problem  that  necessitates  intermediate  ideas  in  order 
that  the  object  be  understood,  For  example,  a  person  draw¬ 
ing  a  room  will  be  compelled  to  form  a  new  idea  of  the 
corner  of  the  room  formed  by  the  meeting  of  two  walls  and 
the  ceiling,  since  now  that  corner  has  to  be  represented 
on  a  plane  surface.  A  child  has  practical  familiarity  with 
squares  and  spheres  in  the  context  of  daily  life,  as  shapes 
of  toys  and  utensils.  But  when  they  present  themselves  in 
a  definitely  geometrical  connection,  he  is  obliged  to  use 
mental  effort  to  form  ideas  of  them. 


r  See  Ward,  Psychic  Factors  of  Civilisation,  p.  163. 


136 


HOW  WE  THINK 


Ideas  Are  Logical  Instruments,  Not  Psychic  Compounds 

It  will  be  noted  that  an  idea  in  its  logical  significance 
is  something  quite  different  from  ideas  as  they  are  often 
treated  in  psychological  texts.  An  idea,  logically  speaking, 
is  not  a  faded  perception  of  an  object,  nor  is  it  a  compound 
of  a  number  of  sensations.  You  would  not  get  the  peculiar 
meaning  that  is  attached  to,  say,  ‘  chair  '  by  having  a  men¬ 
tal  picture  of  one.  A  savage  might  be  able  to  form  an  image 
of  poles  and  wires,  and  a  layman  of  a  complex  scientific 
diagram.  But  unless  the  savage  knew  something  about 
telegraphy,  he  would  have  no  idea,  or  at  least  no  correct 
idea,  of  the  poles  and  wires,  while  the  most  accurate  mental 
reproduction  of  the  diagram  would  leave  the  layman  to¬ 
tally  without  understanding  of  its  meaning,  and  hence  with¬ 
out  an  idea  of  it,  even  though  he  could  list  all  its  qualities 
one  by  one.  The  fact  is  that  an  idea,  intellectually,  cannot 
be  defined  by  its  structure,  but  only  by  its  function  and  use. 
Whatever  in  a  doubtful  situation  or  undecided  issue  helps 
us  to  form  a  judgment  and  to  bring  inference  to  a  conclu¬ 
sion  by  means  of  anticipating  a  possible  solution  is  an  idea, 
.and  nothing  else  is.  It  is  an  idea  because  of  what  it  does  in 
|clearing  up  a  perplexity  or  in  harmonizing  what  is  other- 
''  wise  fragmentary,  not  because  of  its  psychical  make-up. 


II.  Things  and  Meanings 

An  idea  normally  terminates  in  giving  understanding,  so 
that  an  event  or  thing  acquires  meaning.  A  thing  under¬ 
stood,  a  thing  with  a  meaning,  is  different  from  both  an 
idea,  which  is  a  doubtful  and  still  unattached  meaning,  and 
from  a  mere  brute,  physical  thing.  I  can  stumble  against 
something  in  the  dark  and  get  hurt  without  any  understand- 


IDEAS  AND  MEANINGS  I37 

ing  of  what  the  thing  is.  So  far,  it  is  merely  a  thing,  a  some¬ 
thing  or  other.  If  I  get  a  light  and  investigate,  I  learn  that 
the  thing  is  a  stool,  or  a  coalhod,  or  a  log  of  firewood.  Now 
it  is  a  known  object,  a  thing  understood,  a  thing  with  a 
meaning  —  all  three  being  synonymous  expressions. 

To  Understand  Is  to  Grasp  Meaning 

If  a  person  comes  suddenly  into  your  room  and  calls  out 
“Paper,”  various  alternatives  are  possible.  If  you  do  not 
understand  the  English  language,  there  is  simply  a  noise 
that  may  act  as  a  physical  stimulus  or  irritant.  But  the 
noise  is  not  an  intellectual  object;  it  does  not  have  intel¬ 
lectual  value.  It  is  the  mere  brute  thing  just  spoken  of.  If, 
first,  the  cry  is  the  usual  accompaniment  of  the  delivery  of 
the  morning  paper,  the  sound  will  have  meaning,  intellec¬ 
tual  content;  you  will  understand  it.  Or  if,  second,  you  are 
eagerly  awaiting  the  receipt  of  some  important  document, 
you  may  assume  that  the  cry  means  an  announcement  of  its 
arrival.  If,  third,  you  understand  the  English  language,  but 
no  context  suggests  itself  from  your  habits  and  expectations, 
the  ward  has  meaning,  but  not  the  whole  event.  You  are 
then  perplexed  and  incited  to  think  out,  to  hunt  for,  some 
explanation  of  the  apparently  meaningless  occurrence.  If 
you  find  something  that  accounts  for  the  performance,  it 
gets  meaning;  you  come  to  understand  it.  As  intelligent  be¬ 
ings,  we  presume  the  existence  of  meaning,  and  its  absence 
is  an  anomaly.  Hence,  if  it  should  turn  out  that  the  person 
merely  meant  to  inform  you  that  there  was  a  scrap  of  paper 
on  the  sidewalk,  or  that  paper  existed  somewhere  in  the 
universe,  you  would  think  him  crazy  or  yourself  the  victim 
of  a  stupid  joke.  To  grasp  the  meaning  of  a  thing,  an  event, 
or  a  situation  is  to  see  it  in  its  relations  to  other  things :  to 
note  how  it  operates  or  functions,  what  consequences  fol¬ 
low  from  it,  what  causes  it,  what  uses  it  can  be  put  to.  In 


138  HOW  WE  THINK 

contrast,  what  we  have  called  the  brute  thing,  the  thing 
without  meaning  to  us,  is  something  whose  relations  are 
not  grasped. 

Since  all  knowing,  including  all  scientific  inquiry,  aims 
at  clothing  things  and  events  with  meaning  —  at  under¬ 
standing  them,  —  it  always  proceeds  by  taking  the  thing 
inquired  into  out  of  its  isolation.  Search  is  continued  until 
the  thing  is  discovered  to  be  a  related  part  in  some  larger 
whole.  Thus  a  piece  of  rock  may  be  understood  by  referring 
it  to  a  sedimentary  stratum  known  to  have  been  formed 
under  certain  conditions,  or  a  suddenly  appearing  light  in 
the  heavens  may  be  understood  when  identified  as  the  re¬ 
turn  of  Halley’s  comet.  Suppose  that  the  rock  has  peculiar 
markings  on  it.  They  may  be  contemplated  purely  estheti- 
cally,  as  curiosities.  But  they  may  arouse  inquiry.  If  so,  the 
resulting  investigation  will  have  for  its  purpose  the  removal 
of  the  apparent  isolation,  the  non-connectedness,  of  the 
markings.  Finally,  they  are  explained  as  glacial  scratches. 
They  no  longer  stand  alone.  They  have  been  brought  into 
connection  with  a  past  era  of  the  earth’s  history  in  which 
great  masses  of  slow-moving  ice  descended  into  regions 
now  temperate,  carrying  with  them  grit  and  rocks  that 
ground  and  scratched  other  rocks  imbedded  in  place. 

Interaction  of  Two  Modes  of  Understanding 

In  these  illustrations  two  types  of  grasp  of  meaning  have 
been  exemplified.  When  the  English  language  is  understood, 
the  person  grasps  at  once  the  meaning  of  ‘paper.’  He  may 
not,  however,  see  any  meaning  or  sense  in  the  performance 
as  a  whole.  Similarly,  the  person  identifies  the  object  on 
sight  as  a  stone;  there  is  no  secret,  no  mystery,  no  perplex¬ 
ity,  about  that.  But  he  does  not  understand  the  markings 
I  on  it.  They  have  some  meaning,  but  what  is  it?  In  one  case, 
'  owing  to  familiar  acquaintance,  the  thing  and  its  meaning, 


IDEAS  AND  MEANINGS  139 

up  to  a  certain  point,  are  one;  in  the  other,  the  thing  and 
its  meaning  are,  temporarily  at  least,  sundered,  and  mean¬ 
ing  has  to  be  sought  in  order  to  understand  the  thing.  In 
tone  case  understanding  is  direct,  prompt,  immediate;  in 
the  other,  it  is  roundabout  and  delayed. 

Most  languages  have  two  sets  of  words  to  express  these 
two  modes  of  understanding;  one  for  the  direct  taking  in 
or  grasp  of  meaning,  the  other  for  its  circuitous  apprehen¬ 
sion,  thus;  yvSivaL  and  eiSkvai  in  Greek;  noscere  and  scire 
in  Latin;  kernien  and  wissen  in  German;  connaitre  and 
savoir  in  French;  while  in  English  to  he  acquainted  with 
and  to  know  of  or  about  have  been  suggested  as  equiva- 
lents.“  Now,  our  intellectual  life  consists  of  a  peculiar 
interaction  between  these  two  types  of  understanding.  All 
judgment,  all  reflective  inference,  presupposes  some  lack  of 
understanding,  a  partial  absence  of  meaning.  We  reflect  in 
order  that  we  may  get  hold  of  the  full  and  adequate  sig¬ 
nificance  of  what  happens.  Nevertheless,  something  must 
be  already  understood,  the  mind  must  be  in  possession  of 
some  meaning  that  it  has  mastered,  or  else  thinking  is  im¬ 
possible.  We  think  in  order  to  grasp  meaning,  but  none  the 
less  every  extension  of  knowledge  makes  us  aware  of  blind 
and  opaque  spots,  where  with  less  knowledge  all  had  seemed 
obvious  and  natural.  A  scientist  brought  into  a  new  district 
will  find  many  things  that  he  does  not  understand,  while 
the  native  savage  or  rustic  will  be  wholly  oblivious  to  any 
meanings  beyond  those  directly  apparent.  Some  Indiana 
brought  to  a  large  city  remained  stolid  at  the  sight  of  me¬ 
chanical  wonders  of  bridge,  trolley,  and  telephone,  but  were 

2  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  I,  p.  221.  To  know  and  to 
know  that  are  perhaps  more  precise  equivalents ;  compare  “  I  Imow 
him  "  and  "  I  know  that  he  has  gone  home,”  The  former  expresses  a 
fact  simply;  for  the  latter,  evidence  might  he  demanded  and 
supplied. 


140  HOW  WE  THINK 

held  spellbound  by  the  sight  of  workmen  climbing  poles  to 
repair  wires.  Increase  of  the  store  of  meanings  makes  us 
conscious  of  new  problems,  while  only  through  translation 
of  the  new  perplexities  into  what  is  already  familiar  and 
plain  do  we  understand  or  solve  these  problems.  This  is 
the  constant  spiral  movement  of  knowledge. 

Intellectual  Progress  a  Rhythm 

Our  progress  in  genuine  knowledge  always  consists  in 
■part  in  the  discovery  of  something  not  understood  in  what 
had  previously  been  taken  for  granted  as  plain,  obvious, 
matter-of-course,  and  in  part  in  using  meanings  that  are 
directly  grasped  as  instruments  for  getting  hold  of  obscure 
and  doubtful  meanings.  No  object  is  so  familiar,  so  obvious, 
so  commonplace  that  it  may  not  unexpectedly  present,  in  a 
novel  situation,  some  problem,  and  thus  arouse  reflection  in 
order  to  understand  it.  No  object  or  principle  is  so  strange, 
peculiar,  or  remote  that  it  may  not  be  dwelt  upon  till  its 
meaning  becomes  familiar  —  taken  in  on  sight  without  re¬ 
flection.  We  may  come  to  see,  perceive,  recognize,  grasp, 
seise,  lay  hold  of  principles,  laws,  abstract  truths — i.e.,  to 
understand  their  meaning  in  an  immediate  fashion.  Our  in¬ 
tellectual  progress  consists,  as  has  been  said,  in  a  rhythm  of 
direct  understanding  —  technically  called  apprehension  — 
with  indirect,  mediated  understanding  —  technically  called 
comprehension. 

III.  The  Peocbss  by  Which  Things  Acquiee  Meaning 

The  first  problem  that  comes  up  in  connection  with  direct 
understanding  is  how  a  store  of  directly  recognized  mean¬ 
ings  is  built  up.  How  do  we  learn  to  view  things  on  sight  as 
significant  members  of  a  situation  or  as  having,  as  a  matter 
of  course,  specific  meanings?  Our  chief  diflSoulty  in  answer- 


IDEAS  AND  MEANINGS  141 

ing  this  question  lies  in  the  thoroughness  with  which  the  les¬ 
son  of  familiar  things  has  been  learned.  Thought  can  more 
easily  traverse  an  unexplored  region  than  it  can  undo  what 
has  been  so  thoroughly  done  as  to  be  ingrained  in  uncon¬ 
scious  habit.  We  apprehend  chairs,  tables,  books,  trees, 
horses,  clouds,  stars,  rain,  so  promptly  and  directly  that  it 
is  hard  to  realize  that  once  these  objects  were  mere  brute 
things,  as  alien  to  our  understanding  as  the  sounds  of  the 
Choctaw  language  would  be  if  we  now  suddenly  heard  them. 

Vague  Wholes  Are  Antecedent  to  Understanding 

In  an  often  quoted  passage,  Mr.  James  has  said:  “The 
baby,  assailed  by  eyes,  ears,  nose,  skin,  and  entrails  at  once, 
feels  it  all  as  one  great  blooming,  buzzing  confusion."  “  Mr. 
James  is  speaking  of  a  baby’s  world  taken  as  a  whole;  the 
description,  however,  is  equally  applicable  to  the  way  any 
new  thing  strikes  an  adult,  so  far  as  the  thing  is  really  new 
and  strange.  To  the  traditional  ‘  cat  in  a  strange  garret,’ 
everything  is  blurred  and  confused;  the  usual  marks  that 
label  things  so  as  to  separate  them  from  one  another  are 
lacking.  Foreign  languages  that  we  do  not  understand  al¬ 
ways  seem  jabberings,  babblings,  in  which  it  is  impossible 
to  fix  a  definite,  clear-cut,  individualized  group  of  sounds. 
The  countryman  in  the  crowded  city  street,  the  landlubber 
at  sea,  the  ignoramus  in  sport  at  a  contest  between  experts 
in  a  complicated  game,  are  instances.  Put  an  unexperienced 
man  in  a  factory,  and  at  first  the  work  seems  to  him  a 
meaningless  medley.  All  strangers  of  another  race  proverbi¬ 
ally  look  alike  to  the  visiting  foreigner.  Only  gross  differ¬ 
ences  of  size  or  color  are  perceived  by  an  outsider  in  a  flock 
of  sheep,  each  of  which  is  perfectly  individualized  to  the 
shepherd.  A  diffusive  blur  and  indiscriminate  shifting  char- 
acteriaa  what  we  do  not  understand.  The  problem  of  the 
®  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol,  I,  p.  48S. 


HOW  WE  THINK 


142 

acquisition  of  meaning  by  things,  or  (stated  in  another 
way)  of  forming  habits  of  simple  apprehension,  is  thus  the 
problem  of  introducing  (o)  dejinitene&s,  or  distinction  and 
(b)  consistency,  coherence,  constancy,  or  stability  of  mean¬ 
ing  into  what  is  otherwise  vague  and  wavering. 

Practical  Responses  Clarify  the  Vague 

The  acquisition  of  definiteness  and  of  eonsistency  of  mean¬ 
ings  is  derived  primarily  from  practical  activities.  By  rolling 
an  object,  the  child  makes  its  roundness  appreciable;  by 
bouncing  it,  he  singles  out  its  elasticity;  by  lifting  it,  he 
makes  weight  its  conspicuous  distinctive  factor.  Not  through 
the  senses,  but  by  means  of  the  reaction,  the  responsive  ad¬ 
justment,  is  an  impression  given  a  character  marked  off 
from  qualities  that  call  out  unlike  reactions.  Children,  for 
example,  are  usually  quite  slow  in  apprehending  differences 
in  color.  Differences  from  the  standpoint  of  the  adult  so 
glaring  that  it  is  impossible  not  to  note  them  are  recognized 
and  recalled  by  the  young  with  great  difficulty.  Doubtless 
colors  do  not  all  feel  alike,  but  there  is  no  intellectual  rec¬ 
ognition  of  what  constitutes  the  difference.  The  redness  or 
greenness  or  blueness  of  the  object  does  not  call  out  a  reaction 
that  is  sufficiently  peculiar  to  give  prominence  or  distinc¬ 
tion  to  the  color  trait.  Gradually,  however,  certain  char¬ 
acteristic  habitual  responses  associate  themselves  with 
certain  things;  the  white  becomes  the  sign,  say,  of  milk 
and  sugar,  to  which  the  child  reacts  favorably;  blue  be¬ 
comes  the  sign  of  a  dress  that  the  child  likes  to  wear, 
and  so  on ;  and  the  distinctiva  reactions  tend  to  single  out 
color  qualities  from  other  things  in  which  they  had  been 
submerged. 

Take  another  example.  We  have  little  difficulty  in  distin¬ 
guishing  from  one  another  rakes,  hoes,  plows  and  harrows, 
shovels  and  spades.  Each  has  its  own  associated  characteris- 


IDEAS  AND  MEANINGS  I43 

tic  use  and  function.  A  student  of  botany  or  chemistry  may 
have,  however,  great  difficulty  in  recalling  the  difference 
between  serrate  and  dentate,  ovoid  and  obovoid,  in  the 
shapes  and  edges  of  leaves,  or  between  acids  in  ic  and  in 
ous.  There  is  some  difference;  but  just  what?  Or,  he  knows 
what  the  difference  is;  but  which  is  which?  Variations  in 
form,  size,  color,  and  arrangement  of  parts  have  much  less 
to  do,  and  the  uses,  purposes,  and  functions  of  things  and 
of  their  parts  much  more  to  do,  with  distinctness  of  character 
and  meaning  than  we  should  be  likely  to  think.  What  mis¬ 
leads  us  is  the  fact  that  the  qualities  of  form,  size,  color,  and 
so  on,  are  now  so  distinct  that  we  fail  to  see  that  the  problem 
is  precisely  to  account  for  the  way  in  which  they  originally 
obtained  their  definiteness  and  conspicuousness.  As  long  as 
we  sit  passive  before  objects,  they  are  not  distinguished  out 
of  the  vague  blur  that  swallows  them  all.  Differences  in 
the  pitch  and  intensity  of  sounds  leave  behind  a  different 
feeling,  but  until  we  assume  different  attitudes  toward  them, 
or  do  something  special  in  reference  to  them,  their  vague 
difference  cannot  be  intellectually  gripped  and  retained. 

Illustrations  from  Drawing  and  Language 

Children's  drawings  afford  a  further  exemplification  of 
the  same  principle.  Perspective  does  not  exist,  for  the  child's 
interest  is  not  in  pictorial  representation,  but  in  the  values 
of  the  things  represented;  and  while  perspective  is  essen¬ 
tial  to  the  former,  it  is  no  part  of  the  characteristic  use 
and  function  of  the  things  themselves.  The  house  is  drawn 
with  transparent  walla,  because  the  rooms,  chairs,  beds,  peo¬ 
ple  inside,  are  the  important  things  in  the  house- meaning; 
smoke  always  comes  out  of  the  chimney  —  otherwise,  why 
have  a  chimney  at  all?  At  Christmas  time,  the  stockings 
may  be  drawn  almost  as  large  as  the  house  or  even  so  large 
that  they  have  to  be  put  outside  of  it  —  in  any  case,  it  is 


144  HOW  WE  THINK 

the  scale  of  values  in  use  that  furnishes  the  scale  for  their 
qualities.  The  drawings  are  diagrammatic  reminders  of  these 
values,  not  impartial  records  of  physical  and  sensory  quali¬ 
ties.  One  of  the  chief  difficulties  felt  by  most  persons  in 
learning  the  art  of  pictorial  representation  is  that  habitual 
uses  and  results  of  use  have  become  so  intimately  read  into 
the  character  of  things  that  it  is  practically  impossible  to 
shut  them  out  at  will. 

The  acquiring  of  meaning  by  sounds,  in  virtue  of  which 
they  become  words,  is  perhaps  the  most  striking  illustration 
that  can  be  found  of  the  way  in  which  mere  sensory  stimuli 
acquire  definiteness  and  constancy  of  meaning  and  are 
thereby  themselves  defined  and  interconnected  for  purposes 
of  recognition.  Language  is  a  specially  good  example  be¬ 
cause  there  are  hundreds  or  even  thousands  of  words  in 
which  meaning  is  now  so  thoroughly  consolidated  with 
physical  qualities  as  to  be  directly  understood.  In  the  case 
of  words  it  is  easier  to  recognize  that  this  connection  has 
been  gradually  and  laboriously  acquired  than  in  the  case 
of  physical  objects,  such  as  chairs,  tables,  buttons,  trees, 
stones,  hills,  flowers,  and  so  on,  where  it  seems  as  if  the 
union  of  intellectual  meaning  with  physical  fact  were  abo¬ 
riginal.  It  now  seems  to  be  thrust  upon  us  rather  than  ac¬ 
quired  through  active  explorations.  But  in  the  case  of  the 
meaning  of  words,  we  see  readily  that  it  is  by  making 
sounds  and  noting  the  results  that  follow,  by  listening  to 
the  sounds  of  others  and  watching  the  activities  that  ac¬ 
company  them,  that  a  given  sound  finally  becomes  the  stable 
bearer  of  a  meaning. 

Meaning  and  Context 

In  the  case  of  the  meaning  of  words,  we  are  aware  by 
watching  children  and  by  our  own  experience  in  learning 
French  or  German  that  happenings,  like  sounds,  which 


IDEAS  AND  MEANINGS  145 

originally  were  devoid  of  significance  acquire  meaning  by 
use,  and  that  this  use  always  involves  a  context.  With  chil¬ 
dren  just  learning  to  understand  and  use  speech,  the  con¬ 
text  is  largely  that  of  objects  and  acts.  A  child  associates 
hat  with  putting  something  on  his  head  when  he  is  going 
outdoors;  drawer  with  pulling  something  out  of  a  table,  etc. 
Single  words,  because  of  the  direct  presence  of  a  context  of 
actions  performed  with  objects,  then  have  the  force  that 
complete  sentences  have  to  an  older  person.  Gradually  other 
words  that  originally  gained  meaning  by  use  in  a  context  of 
overt  actions  become  capable  of  supplying  the  context,  so 
that  the  mind  can  dispense  with  the  context  of  things  and 
deeds.  Speaking  in  sentences  marks  obviously  a  linguistic 
gain.  But  the  more  important  matter  is  that  it  shows 
a  person  has  made  a  great  intellectual  advance.  He  can  now 
think  by  putting  together  verbal  signs  of  things  that  are 
not  present  to  the  senses  and  are  not  accompanied  by  any 
overt  actions  on  his  part.  As  he  understands  similar  com¬ 
binations  made  by  others,  he  has  a  new  resource  that  ex¬ 
tends  his  otherwise  narrow  personal  experience  indefinitely. 
When  he  learns  to  read,  arbitrary  marks  on  paper  acquire 
meaning  for  him,  and  he  gains  possession  of  the  means  of 
still  further  extending  his  experience  so  as  to  include  what 
others,  far  remote  from  him  in  space  and  time,  have  ex¬ 
perienced. 

As  was  indicated  a  short  time  ago,  it  is  not  easy  to  grasp 
the  fact  that  things  had  at  first  no  significance  in  our 
experience,  and  that  significance  was  acquired  in  their 
case,  as  in  that  of  sounds,  by  entering  into  a  context  of 
use,  by  bringing  help  and  enjoyment  to  us  —  articles  of 
food,  furniture,  and  wearing  apparel,  —  or  by  bringing 
harm  and  suffering  —  like  fire  approached  too  closely, 
pins  that  scratch,  hammers  that  hit  fingers  instead  of 
nails. 


146  HOW  WE  THINK 

Take,  for  example,  a  little  spark  of  light  appearing  at 
night  in  the  heavens,  and  compare  the  original  mere  sight 
of  it  with  the  discriminating  and  extensive  knowledge  of  it 
that  the  expert  astronomer  has.  He  identifies  it,  say,  as 
planet,  asteroid,  stellite,  or  fixed  star  that  is  the  sun  of 
some  other  system.  Each  one  of  these  things  carries  an  im¬ 
mense  store  of  meanings  with  it — distance,  rate 'of  move¬ 
ment,  chemical  composition,  indeed  all  the  things  that  one 
finds  in  a  bulky  volume  upon  astronomy.  The  change  from 
a  mere  spark  to  an  immensely  significant  object  illustrates 
the  acquisition  of  meaning  which  has  taken  place  in  the 
case  of  everything  that  we  understand  or  know.  It  illus¬ 
trates  also  the  fact  that  the  acquisition  of  ability  to  under¬ 
stand  (which  is  the  same  as  the  acquisition  of  significance 
by  things)  is  immensely  furthered  by  language  and  by 
elaboration  of  a  series  of  meanings  *  and  through  reasoning, 
This  latter  process  is  itself  dependent  upon  possession  of 
some  kind  of  linguistic  sign  system  —  for  we  must  remem¬ 
ber  that  mathematical  symbols  are  also  a  kind  of  language. 

The  Means-Consequence  Relation  and  Its  Educational 
Significance 

We  may  sum  up  by  stating  that  things  gain  meaning 
when  they  are  used  as  means  to  bring  about  consequences 
(or  as  means  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  undesired  con¬ 
sequences),  or  as  standing  for  consequences  for  which  we 
have  to  discover  means.  The  relation  of  means-consequence 
is  the  center  and  heart  of  all  understanding.  The  operations 
by  which  things  become  understood  as  chairs,  tables,  shoes, 
hats,  food,  illustrate  the  means-consequence  relation  from 
the  ‘  means  ’  side.  The  relation  beginning  with  the  ‘  conse¬ 
quence,’  or  result-sought,  side  is  illustrated  in  any  inven¬ 
tion.  Edison  thought  of  producing  light  by  the  use  of  eleo- 
*  See  page  112. 


IDEAS  AND  MEANINGS  I47 

tricity ;  he  then  had  to  discover  the  conditions  of  things  and 
relations  that  would  produce  it  —  the  means  for  it.  The 
same  obtained  with  Langley  and  the  Wright  brothers  after 
they  conceived  the  idea^  as  a  desired  end,  of  a  machine  to 
fly  in  the  air.  It  is  illustrated  in  all  cases  of  ordinary  plan¬ 
ning.  We  think  of  something  needful  or  desirable,  and  then 
we  have  to  seek  out  materials  and  methods  for  bringing  it 
to  pass.  Every  time  we  have  to  solve  a  problem  of  this  kind, 
things  enter  into  the  means-consequence  relation  and  in  do¬ 
ing  BO  take  on  added  meaning,  just  as  carbon  filaments  ob¬ 
tained  a  new  significance  through  the  production  of  electric 
light,  and  as  gasoline,  once  almost  a  waste  by-product,  se¬ 
cured  new  meaning  when  the  internal-combustion  engine 
was  invented. 

The  educational  bearing  of  this  principle  is  almost  too 
obvious  for  mention.  One  of  the  chief  causes  for  failure  in 
school  to  secure  that  gain  in  ability  to  understand  that  is 
a  precious  educational  result  is  the  neglecting  to  set  up  the 
conditions  for  active  use  as  a  means  in  bringing  conse¬ 
quences  to  pass  —  the  neglecting  to  provide  pro]  ects  that 
call  out  the  inventiveness  and  ingenuity  of  pupils  in, pro¬ 
posing  aims  to  realize,  or  finding  means  to  realize,  conse¬ 
quences  already  thought  of.  All  routine  and  all  externally 
dictated  activity  fail  to  develop  ability  to  understand,  even 
though  they  promote  skill  in  external  doing.  Too  many  so- 
called  ‘  problems,’  in  reality  assigned  tasks,  call  at  best  sim¬ 
ply  for  a  kind  of  mechanical  dexterity  in  applying  set  rules 
and  manipulating  symbols.  In  short,  there  is  a  challenge  to 
understanding  only  when  there  is  either  a  desired  conse¬ 
quence  for  which  means  have  to  be  found  by  inquiry,  or 
things  (including  symbols  in  the  degree  in  which  experi¬ 
ence  has  matured)  are  presented  under  conditions  where 
reflection  is  required  to  see  what  consequences  can  be  ef¬ 
fected  by  their  use. 


148  HOW  WE  THINK 

It  is  assumed  too  irequently  that  subject  matter  is  ua- 
deratood  when  it  has  been  stored  in  memory  and  can  be 
reproduced  upon  demand.  The  net  outcome  of  our  discus¬ 
sion  is  that  nothing  is  really  known  except  in  so  far  as  it  is 
understood. 


OHAPTEE  TEN 


UNDERSTANDING:  CONCEPTION 
AND  DEFINITION 


I.  The  NATHiua  op  Conceptions 

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  discussed  meaning  from  two 
points  of  view,  and  we  suggested  a  third  aspect  of  it  that  we 
shall  consider  more  fully  in  this  chapter.  The  two  aspects 
that  were  discussed  were  (1)  meaning  as  doubtful,  as  a  hy¬ 
pothetical  possibility;  in  short  as  an  idea  (which,  as  was 
pointed  out,  is  not  a  mere  psychological  complex  but  is  an 
object  or  situation  that  has  a  status  of  being  supposed  in¬ 
stead  of  being  accepted),  and  (2)  meaning  as  a  property  of 
things  and  events.  It  was  shown  in  that  connection  how 
things  acquire  meaning  and  how  finally  meaning  is  so 
consolidated  with  a  thing  that  we  do  not  dream  of  separat¬ 
ing  the  thing  from  its  significance. 

They  Are  Established  Meanings 

The  aspect  of  meaning  that  was  indicated  in  passing  is 
the  fact  that  an  idea,  after  it  has  been  used  as  a  guide  to 
observation  and  action,  may  be  confirmed  and  so  acquire  an 
accepted  status  on  its  own  behalf.  Afterwards  it  is  employed, 
not  tentatively  and  conditionally,  but  with  assurance 
as  an  instrumentality  of  understanding  and  explaining  things 
that  are  still  uncertain  and  perplexing,  These  established 
meanings,  taken  to  be  secure  and  warranted,  are  concep¬ 
tions.  They  are  means  of  judgment  because  they  are  stand¬ 
ards  of  reference.  They  may  be  best  described  as  ‘  standard- 


HOW  WE  THINK 


150 

ized  meanings.'  Every  common  noun  that  is  familiar  and  so 
well  understood  in  itself  that  it  can  be  used  to  judge  other 
things  expresses  a  concept.  Table,  stone,  sunset,  grass,  ani¬ 
mal,  moon,  and  on  through  the  list  of  common  nouns  that 
are  solid  and  dependable,  are  concepts  in  their  meaning.  We 
see  an  object  that  looks  strange;  we  are  told  that  it  is  the 
kind  of  bed  used  by  a  certain  folk.  The  thing  in  question 
is  no  longer  unfamiliar  in  meaning;  to  us  its  significance  is 
settled. 


They  Enable  Us  to  Generalize 

Concepts  enable  us  to  generalize,  to  extend  and  carry  over 
our  understanding  from  one  thing  to  another.  If  we  know 
what  ‘  bed  ’  means  in  general,  we  at  least  can  tell  what  kind 
or  what  sort  of  thing  the  individual  thing  is.  It  is  plain  that 
conceptions,  since  they  represent  the  whole  class  or  set 
of  things,  economize  our  intellectual  efforts  tremendously. 
Sometimes  of  course  we  are  especially  interested  in  the 
peculiar  traits  of  an  object,  in  what  is  unique  about  it,  what 
makes  it  an  individual.  But  for  practical  purposes  it  is  often 
enough  to  know  what  kind  of  thing  it  is;  knowing  that 
fact,  we  can  bring  into  play  the  habits  of  thought  and  be¬ 
havior  that  belong  to  every  member  of  the  entire  class.  The 
concept  calls  into  play  whatever  is  appropriate  to  a  large 
number  of  cases  previously  known,  thus  freeing  thought 
from  preoccupation  with  finding  out  what  this  is. 

They  Standardize  Our  Knowledge 

Conceptions  standardize  our  knowledge.  They  introduce 
solidity  into  what  would  otherwise  be  formless,  and  perma¬ 
nence  into  what  would  otherwise  be  shifting.  If  pounds  arbi¬ 
trarily  changed  their  weight  and  foot  rules  their  length 
while  we  were  using  them,  weighing  and  measuring  would, 
obviously,  amount  to  nothing.  What  would  it  signify  to  say 


CONCEPTION  AND  DEEINITION  161 
that  a  piece  of  cloth  was  a  yard  and  a  half  wide,  or  that  a 
bulk  of  sugar  weighed  twenty  pounds?  The  standard  of  ref¬ 
erence  must  remain  the  same  to  be  of  any  use.  (The  concept 
signifies  that  a  meaning  has  been  stabilized  and  remains  the 
game  in  different  contexts.  Sometimes  when  persona  are  dis¬ 
cussing  a  controversial  matter,  the  argument  gets  confused 
and  the  debaters  misled  because,  as  they  go  along,  they  un¬ 
consciously  shift  the  meanings  of  the  terras  they  use.  Re¬ 
flection  and  new  discoveries  may,  to  be  sure,  change  the 
meaning  of  an  old  concept,  just  as  people  may  change  from 
the  foot-pound  system  of  measurement  to  the  metric  sys¬ 
tem.  But  they  should  know  what  they  are  about  and  de¬ 
liberately  note  that  they  are  using  a  changed  meaning  unless 
they  are  to  get  hopelessly  mixed  up. 

When  persons  are  said  to  have  come  to  an  understanding 
with  each  other,  it  is  meant  that  they  have  arrived  at  an 
agreement  or  settlement  of  some  affair  or  issue  that  has  been 
under  discussion  between  them.  This  fact  indicates  that 
standardized  and  stable  meanings  are  a  condition  of  effec¬ 
tive  communication.  When  two  persons  speak  languages 
that  are  not  mutually  understood,  they  can  still  commu¬ 
nicate  to  some  extent,  provided  there  are  gestures  which 
have  identical  meanings  for  both  parties.  Indeed,  the  so¬ 
cial  necessity  of  meanings  that  are  the  same  for  two  persons 
in  spite  of  differences  in  their  experiences  and  their  condi¬ 
tions  of  life  is  one  of  the  chief  forces  in  standardizing  mean¬ 
ings.  After  they  are  socially  stabilized,  an  individual  has 
the  ability  to  keep  his  own  thinking  steady  because  some 
of  his  thoughts  remain  constant  in  what  they  refer  to; 
‘  chair  ’  always  signifies  the  same;  so  do  ‘  sun,’  ‘  water,’ 
'  earth,’  etc.  Each  of  our  entire  list  of  common  nouns  always 
refers  to  the  same  objects,  in  spite  of  differences  of  place, 
time,  and  other  conditions  of  experience. 


162 


HOW  WE  THINK 


They  Help  Identify  the  Unknown  and  Supplement  the  Sensibly 

Present 

Stating  the  matter  somewhat  differently,  conceptions,  or 
standard  meanings,  are  instruments  of  (a)  identification, 
(b)  siipplementation,  and  (c)  placing  an  object  in  a  sys¬ 
tem.  Suppose  a  little  speck  of  light  hitherto  unseen  is  de¬ 
tected  in  the  heavens.  Unless  there  is  a  store  of  meanings  to 
fall  back  upon  in  reasoning,  that  speck  of  light  will  remain 
just  what  it  is  to  the  senses  —  a  mere  speck  of  light,  For  all 
that  it  leads  to  intellectually,  it  might  as  well  be  a  mere  irri¬ 
tation  of  the  optic  nerve.  Given,  however,  the  stock  of  mean¬ 
ings  built  up  in  prior  experience,  this  speck  of  light  is  men¬ 
tally  attacked  by  means  of  appropriate  concepts.  Does  it 
indicate  asteroid,  or  comet,  or  a  new-forming  sun,  or  a 
nebula  resulting  from  some  cosmic  collision  or  disintegra¬ 
tion?  Each  of  these  conceptions  has  its  own  specific  and  dif¬ 
ferentiating  characters,  which  are  then  sought  for  by  minute 
and  persistent  inquiry.  As  a  result,  then,  the  speck  is  iden¬ 
tified,  we  will  say,  as  a  comet.  Through  a  standard  mean¬ 
ing  it  gets  identity  and  stability  of  character.  Supplementa¬ 
tion  then  takes  place.  All  the  known  qualities  of  comets  are 
read  into  this  particular  thing,  even  though  they  have  not 
been  as  yet  observed.  All  that  the  astronomers  of  the  past 
have  learned  about  the  paths  and  structure  of  comets  be¬ 
comes  available  capital  with  which  to  interpret  the  speck 
of  light.  Finally,  this  comet-meaning  is,  itself,  not  isolated; 
it  is  a  related  portion  of  the  whole  system  of  astronomic 
knowledge.  Suns,  planets,  satellites,  nebulse,  comets,  meteors, 
star  dust  —  all  these  conceptions  have  a  certain  mutuality 
of  reference  and  interaction,  and  when  the  speck  of  light  is 
identified  as  meaning  a  comet,  it  is  at  once  adopted  as  a  full 
member  in  this  vast  kingdom  of  beliefs. 

Darwin,  in  an  autobiographical  sketch,  says  that  when 


CONCEPTION  AND  DEFINITION  153 

a  youth  he  told  the  geologist,  Sidgwiek,  of  finding  a  tropi¬ 
cal  shell  in  a  certain  gravel  pit.  Thereupon  Sidgwiek  said  it 
must  have  been  thrown  there  by  some  person,  adding:  “  But 
if  it  were  really  embedded  there,  it  would  be  the  greatest 
misfortune  to  geology,  because  it  would  overthrow  all  that 
we  know  about  the  superficial  deposits  of  the  Midland 
Counties”  —  since  these  were  glacial.  And  then  Darwin 
adds :  “  I  was  then  utterly  astonished  at  Sidgwiek  not  be¬ 
ing  delighted  at  so  wonderful  a  fact  as  a  tropical  shell  being 
found  near  the  surface  in  the  middle  of  England,  Nothing 
before  had  made  me  thoroughly  realize  that  science  con¬ 
sists  in  grouping  facts  so  that  general  laws  or  conclusions 
may  be  drawn  from  them.”  This  instance  (which  might,  of 
course,  be  duplicated  from  any  branch  of  science)  indicates 
how  scientific  notions  make  explicit  the  systematizing  tend¬ 
ency  involved  in  all  use  of  concepts. 

The  Educational  Significance  of  Concepts 

It  follows  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  overestimate  the 
educational  importance  of  arriving  at  conceptions:  that  is, 
of  meanings  that  are  general  because  applicable  in  a  great 
variety  of  different  instances  in  spite  of  their  difference; 
that  are  constant,  uniform,  or  self-identical  in  what  they 
refer  to,  and  that  are  standardized,  known  points  of  refer¬ 
ence  by  which  to  get  our  bearings  when  we  are  plunged  into 
the  strange  and  unknown. 

Young  children  cannot  of  course  acquire  and  employ  the 
same  conceptions  that  persons  of  riper  experience  use.  But 
at  every  stage  of  development,  each  lesson,  in  order  to  be 
educative,  should  lead  up  to  a  certain  amount  of  conceptual¬ 
izing  of  impressions  and  ideas.  Without  this  conceptualizing 
or  intellectualizing,  nothing  is  gained  that  can  be  carried 
over  to  the  better  understanding  of  new  experiences.  The 
deposit  is  what  counts,  educationally  speaking.  No  amount 


HOW  WE  THINK 


154 

of  transient  interest,  however  absorbing  and  exciting  it 
may  be,  can  compensate  for  failure  to  achieve  an  intellec¬ 
tual  deposit. 

The  very  importance  of  concepts  has  led,  however,  to 
great  mistakes  in  the  conduct  of  teaching.  What  we  earlier 
termed  the  false  use  of  the  '  logical '  ^  had  its  roots  in  the 
belief  that  somehow  definite  and  general  meanings,  or  con¬ 
cepts,  can  be  presented  to  pupils  and  absorbed  by  them 
ready-made,  thus  promoting  the  rapidity  and  efficiency  of 
acquisition  of  knowledge.  In  consequence,  failure  to  ob¬ 
serve  the  conditions  that  are  essential  for  the  formation  of 
conceptions  left  most  pupils  with  only  verbal  formulae. 
Concepts  were  often  presented  that  were  so  remote  from 
the  understanding  and  experience  of  students  as  to  be 
positively  confusing  in  their  artificiality. 

The  reaction  of  education  in  experimental  schools  against 
the  arbitrary  imposition  of  indigestible  material  has  often, 
however,  been  a  reaction  to  the  opposite  extreme.  A  variety 
of  worth-while  experiences  and  activities  with  real  mate¬ 
rials  is  introduced,  but  pains  are  not  taken  to  make  sure 
that  the  activities  terminate  in  that  which  makes  them  edu¬ 
cationally  worth  while,  as  distinct  from  an  agreeable  passing 
of  the  time  —  namely,  the  achievement  of  a  fairly  definite 
intellectualization  of  the  experience.  This  intellectualization 
is  the  deposit  of  an  idea  that  is  both  definite  and  general. 
Education  in  its  intellectual  aspect  and  getting  an  idea  from 
what  is  experienced  are  synonymous.  What  does  having  an 
experience  amount  to  unless,  as  it  ceases  to  exist,  it  leaves 
behind  an  increment  of  meaning,  a  better  understanding  of 
something,  a  clearer  future  plan  and  purpose  of  action:  in 
short,  an  idea?  With  respect  to  teaching  there  is  no  more 
important  topic  than  the  question  of  the  way  in  which  genu¬ 
ine  concepts  are  formed.  To  that  question  we  now  turn. 

1  See  page  79, 


CONCEPTION  AND  DEFINITION  155 


II.  How  Conceptions  Abibe 

They  Are  Not  Formed  by  Extracting  Common  Traits  from 
Ready-Made  Objects 

It  is  convenient  in  discussing  this  question  to  begin  with 
the  negative  side,  with  the  mistaken  character  of  some  cur¬ 
rent  beliefs  about  the  way  in  which  conceptions  come  into 
existence.  They  are  not  derived  by  taking  a  number  of 
things,  each  of  which  is  already  well  understood  and  definite 
in  meaning,  and  then  comparing  them  one  with  another, 
point  by  point,  till  all  different  qualities  are  excluded  and 
there  remains  a  core  of  what  is  common  to  all.  The  origin 
of  concepts  is  sometimes  described  to  be  as  if  a  child  began 
with  a  lot  of  different  particular  things,  say  particular  dogs: 
his  own  Fido,  his  neighbor’s  Carlo,  his  cousin’s  Tray.  Hav¬ 
ing  all  these  different  objects  before  him,  he  analyzes  them 
into  a  lot  of  different  qualities,  say  (a)  color,  (b)  size,  (c) 
shape,  [d]  number  of  legs,  (e)  quantity  and  quality  of  hair, 
(/)  foods  eaten,  and  so  on;  and  then  strikes  out  all  the 
unlike  qualities  (such  as  color,  size,  shape,  hair) ,  retaining 
traits,  such  as  quadruped  and  domesticated,  which  they  all 
have  in  common. 

They  Begin  with  Experiences 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  child  begins  with  whatever  sig¬ 
nificance  he  has  got  out  of  some  one  dog  he  has  seen,  heard, 
and  played  with.  He  carries  over  from  his  experience  of  this 
one  object  to  his  subsequent  experiences  expectations  of  char¬ 
acteristic  modes  of  behavior:  he  expects  them  before  they 
show  themselves.  He  assumes  this  attitude  of  anticipation 
whenever  an  object  gives  him  any  excuse  for  it.  Thus  he 
may  call  cats  ‘  little  dogs  ’  or  horses  ‘  big  dogs.’  But  finding 


156  HOW  WE  THINK 

that  other  expected  traits  and  modes  of  behavior  are  not 
fulfilled,  he  is  forced  to  throw  out  certain  traits  from  the 
dog-meaning,  while  by  contrast  some  other  traits  are  se¬ 
lected  and  emphasized.  As  he  further  applies  the  meaning 
to  other  animals,  the  dog-meaning  gets  still  further  defined 
and  refined.  He  does  not  begin  with  a  lot  of  ready-made 
objects  from  which  he  extracts  a  common  meaning;  he  tries 
to  apply  in  every  new  experience  whatever  result  of  his  old 
experience  will  help  him  understand  and  deal  with  it. 

They  Become  More  Definite  with  Use 

It  is  not  true  that  the  child’s  idea  of  each  individual  dog 
is  clear  and  definite  to  begin  with,  and  that  his  own  dog  is 
perceived  by  him  with  its  full  equipment  of  distinct  quali¬ 
ties.  Kather  his  original  idea  of  Fido  is  vague  and  pulpy, 
wavering,  as  long  as  Fido  is  the  only  dog  ( and  much  more  so 
if  the  only  animal)  he  knows.  By  observing  the  family  cat, 
he  is  led  to  discriminate  the  particular  qualities  that  charac¬ 
terize  each  of  them.  As  he  makes  acquaintance  with  other 
animals,  the  horse,  pig,  etc.,  the  definite  properties  that  be¬ 
long  to  a  dog  are  still  further  demarcated.  Thus,  even  with¬ 
out  much  comparison  with  other  dogs,  a  dog  concept  is 
gradually  built  up.  In  just  the  extent  to  which  he  is  aware 
of  the  qualities  that  make  his  Fido  a  dog,  rather  than  a  cat, 
horse,  or  any  other  animal,  he  has  a  standardized  point  of 
reference  for  assimilating  and  sorting  out  other  animals  as 
he  makes  acquaintance  with  them.  During  the  whole  proc¬ 
ess  he  has  been  trying  to  fit  his  idea,  vague  or  definite  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  stage  of  experience,  on  all  animals  that  are 
at  all  similar  to  dogs,  applying  it  when  he  can,  becoming 
aware  of  differences  whenever  it  won’t  fit.  By  these  proc¬ 
esses,  his  idea  gets  body,  steadiness,  distinction;  it  be¬ 
comes  a  concept. 


CONCEPTION  AND  DEFINITION  157 


They  Become  General  with  Use 

By  the  same  processes,  a  vague,  more  or  less  formless  idea 
acquires  generality.  Conceptions,  that  is  to  say,  are  general 
because  of  use  and  application,  not  because  of  their  ingredi¬ 
ents.  The  view  that  a  conception  originates  in  an  impossible 
sort  of  analysis  has  its  counterpart  in  the  idea  that  it  is  made 
up  out  of  all  the  like  elements  that  remain  after  dissection 
of  a  number  of  individuals.  Not  so ;  the  moment  a  meaning 
is  gained,  it  is  a  working  tool  of  further  apprehensions,  an 
instrument  of  understanding  other  things.  Thereby  the 
meaning  is  extended  as  well  as  defined.  Generality  resides 
in  application  to  the  comprehension  of  new  cases,  not  in 
the  constituent  parts  of  a  notion.  A  collection  of  traits  left 
as  the  common  residuum,  the  caput  mortuum,  of  a  million 
objects,  would  be  merely  a  collection,  an  inventory  or  aggre¬ 
gate,  not  a  general  idea.  Any  striking  trait  emphasized  in 
an  experience  that  afterward  serves  as  an  aid  in  understand¬ 
ing  some  other  experience  becomes,  in  virtue  of  that  appli¬ 
cation,  in  so  far  general. 

What  has  just  been  said  may  be  compared  with  the 
earlier  statements  about  analysis  and  synthesis.^  The  analy¬ 
sis  that  results  in  giving  an  idea  the  solidity  and  definite¬ 
ness  of  a  concept  is  simply  emphasis  upon  that  which  gives 
a  clew  for  dealing  with  some  uncertainty.  If  a  child  iden¬ 
tifies  a  dog  seen  at  a  distance  by  the  way  in  which  the  ani¬ 
mal  wags  its  tail,  then  that  particular  trait,  which  may 
never  have  been  consciously  singled  out  before,  becomes  dis¬ 
tinct —  it  is  analyzed  out  of  its  vague  submergence  in  the 
animal  as  a  whole.  The  only  difference  between  such  a  case 
and  the  analysis  effected  by  a  scientific  inquirer  in  chemis¬ 
try  or  botany  is  that  the  latter  is  alert  for  clews  that  will 
serve  for  the  purpose  of  sure  identification  in  the  widest  pos- 
2  See  pages  127-129. 


HOW  WE  THINK 


158 

sible  area  of  cases;  he  wants  to  find  the  signs  by  which  he 
can  identify  an  object  as  one  of  a  definite  kind  or  class  even 
should  it  present  itself  under  very  unusual  circumstances 
and  in  an  obscure  and  disguised  form.  The  idea  that  the 
selected  trait  is  already  plain  to  the  mind  and  then  is  merely 
isolated  from  other  traits  equally  definite  puts  the  cart  be¬ 
fore  the  horse.  It  is  selection  as  evidence  or  as  a  clew  that 
gives  a  trait  distinctness  it  did  not  possess  before. 

Synthesis  is  the  operation  that  gives  extension  and  gener¬ 
ality  to  an  idea,  as  analysis  makes  the  meaning  distinct. 
Synthesis  is  correlative  to  analysis.  As  soon  as  any  quality 
is  definitely  discriminated  and  given  a  special  meaning  of 
its  own,  the  mind  at  once  looks  around  for  other  cases  to 
which  that  meaning  may  be  applied.  As  it  is  applied,  cases 
that  were  previously  separated  in  meaning  become  assimi¬ 
lated,  identified,  in  their  significance.  They  now  belong  to 
the  same  kind  of  thing.  Even  a  young  child,  as  soon  as  he 
masters  the  meaning  of  a  word,  tries  to  find  occasion  to 
use  it;  if  he  gets  the  idea  of  a  cylinder,  he  sees  cylinders  in 
stove  pipes,  logs,  etc.  In  principle  this  is  not  different  from 
Newton’s  procedure  in  the  story  about  the  origin  in  his 
mind  of  the  concept  of  gravitation.  Having  the  idea  sug¬ 
gested  by  the  falling  of  an  apple,  he  at  once  extended  it  in 
imagination  to  the  moon  as  something  also  tending  to  fall 
towards  the  earth,  and  then  to  the  movements  of  the  planets 
in  relation  to  the  sun,  to  the  movement  of  the  ocean  in  the 
tides,  etc.  In  consequence  of  this  application  of  an  idea  that 
was  discriminated,  made  definite  in  some  one  case,  to  other 
events,  a  large  number  of  phenomena  that  previously  were 
believed  to  be  disconnected  from  one  another  were  integrated 
into  a  consistent  system.  In  other  words,  there  was  a  com¬ 
prehensive  synthesis. 

It  would  be  a  great  mistake,  however,  as  just  indicated, 
to  confine  the  idea  of  synthesis  to  important  cases  like  New- 


CONCEPTION  AND  DEEINITION  159 

ton's  generalization.  On  the  contrary,  when  any  one  carries 
over  any  meaning  from  one  object  to  another  object  that 
had  previously  seemed  to  be  of  a  different  kind,  synthesis 
occurs.  It  is  synthesis  when  a  lad  associates  the  gurgling  that 
takes  place  when  water  is  poured  into  what  he  had  thought 
was  an  empty  bottle  with  the  existence  and  pressure  of  air; 
when  he  learns  to  interpret  the  siphoning  of  water  and  the 
sailing  of  a  boat  in  connection  with  the  same  fact.  It  is 
synthesis  when  things  themselves  as  different  as  clouds, 
meadow,  brook,  and  rocks  are  so  brought  together  as  to  be 
composed  into  a  picture.  It  is  synthesis  when  iron,  tin,  and 
mercury  are  conceived  to  be  of  the  same  kind  in  spite  of 
individual  differences. 


III.  Definition  and  Organization  of  Meanings 
The  Harmful  Consequences  of  Vagueness 

A  being  that  cannot  understand  at  all  is  at  least  pro¬ 
tected  from  mis-understandings.  But  beings  that  get  knowl¬ 
edge  by  means  of  inferring  and  interpreting,  by  judging 
what  things  signify  in  relation  to  one  another,  are  con¬ 
stantly  exposed  to  the  danger  of  mfs-apprehension,  ms- 
understanding,  mfs-taking  —  taking  of  a  thing  amiss.  A 
constant  source  of  misunderstanding  and  mistake  is  indefi¬ 
niteness  of  meaning.  Because  of  vagueness  of  meaning  we 
misunderstand  other  people,  things,  and  ourselves ;  because 
of  ambiguity  we  distort  and  pervert.  Conscious  distortion 
of  meaning  may  be  enjoyed  as  nonsense;  erroneous  mean¬ 
ings,  if  clear-cut,  may  be  followed  up  and  got  rid  of.  But 
vague  meanings  are  too  gelatinous  to  offer  matter  for  analy¬ 
sis  and  too  pulpy  to  afford  support  to  other  beliefs.  They 
evade  testing  and  responsibility.  Vagueness  disguises  the 
unconscious  mixing  together  of  different  meanings,  and  fa- 


HOW  WE  THINK 


100 

cilitates  the  substitution  of  one  meaning  for  another,  and 
covers  up  the  failure  to  have  any  precise  meaning  at  all.  It 
is  the  aboriginal  logical  sin  —  the  source  from  which  flow 
most  bad  intellectual  consequences.  Totally  to  eliminate 
indefiniteness  is  impossible;  to  reduce  it  in  extent  and  in 
force  requires  sincerity  and  vigor. 

Meaning  aa  Intension  and  as  Extension 

To  be  clear  or  perspicuous,  a  meaning  must  be  detached, 
single,  self-contained,  homogeneous  as  it  were,  throughout. 
The  technical  name  for  any  meaning  that  is  thus  indi¬ 
vidualized  is  intension.  The  process  of  arriving  at  such  units 
of  meaning  (and  of  stating  them  when  reached)  is  definition. 
The  intension  of  the  terms  ‘  man,’  ‘  river,’  ‘  honesty,’  ‘  su¬ 
preme  court,’  is  the  meaning  that  exclusively  and  character- 
istically  attaches  to  those  terms.  This  meaning  is  set  forth 
in  definition  of  these  units  of  meaning. 

The  test  of  the  distinctness  of  a  meaning  is  that  it  success¬ 
fully  marks  off  a  group  of  things  that  exemplify  the  mean¬ 
ing  from  other  groups,  especially  from  those  objects  that 
convey  nearly  allied  meanings.  The  river-meaning  (or  char¬ 
acter)  must  serve  to  designate  the  Rhone,  the  Rhine,  the 
Mississippi,  the  Hudson,  the  Wabash,  in  spite  of  their  vari¬ 
eties  of  place,  length,  quality  of  water;  and  must  be  such 
as  not  to  suggest  ocean  currents,  ponds,  or  brooks.  This  use 
of  a  meaning  to  mark  off  and  group  together  a  variety  of 
distinct  existences  constitutes  its  extension. 

As  definition  sets  forth  intension,  so  division  (or  the  re¬ 
verse  process,  classification)  expounds  extension.  Intension 
and  extension,  definition  and  division,  are  clearly  correla¬ 
tive  ;  in  language  previously  used,  intension  is  meaning  as  a 
principle  of  identifying  particulars;  extension  is  the  group 
of  particulars  identified  and  distinguished.  Meaning,  as  ex¬ 
tension,  would  be  wholly  in  the  air  or  unreal,  did  it  not  point 


CONCEPTION  AND  DEFINITION  161 

to  some  object  or  group  of  objects;  while  objects  would  be 
as  isolated  and  independent  intellectually  as  they  seem  to 
be  spatially,  were  they  not  bound  into  groups  or  classes  on 
the  basis  of  characteristic  meanings  they  suggest  and  ex¬ 
emplify  in  a  uniform  way. 

Together,  definition  and  division  put  us  in  possession  of 
definite  meanings  and  also  indicate  the  group  of  objects  to 
which  they  refer,  the  kind  of  things  indicated  and  its  various 
subclasses.  They  typify  the  fixation  and  the  organization 
of  meanings.  In  the  degree  in  which  the  meanings  of  any  set 
of  experiences  are  so  cleared  up  as  to  serve  as  principles  for 
grouping  those  experiences  in  relation  to  one  another,  that 
set  of  particulars  becomes  a  science;  i.e.,  definition  and  clas¬ 
sification  are  the  marks  of  a  science,  as  distinct  from  unre¬ 
lated  heaps  of  miscellaneous  information  and  from  habits 
that  introduce  coherence  into  our  experience  without  our 
being  aware  of  their  operation. 

Three  Types  of  Definitions 

Definitions  are  of  three  types,  denotative,  expository,  sci¬ 
entific.  Of  these,  the  first  and  third  are  logically  important, 
while  the  expository  type  is  socially  and  pedagogically  im¬ 
portant  as  an  intervening  step. 

a.  Denotative.  A  blind  man  can  never  have  an  adequate 
understanding  of  the  meaning  of  color  and  red;  a  seeing 
person  can  acquire  the  knowledge  only  by  having  certain 
things  designated  in  such  a  way  as  to  fix  attention  upon 
some  of  their  qualities.  This  method  of  delimiting  a  mean¬ 
ing  by  calling  out  a  certain  attitude  toward  objects  may  be 
called  denotative,  or  indicative.  It  is  required  for  all  sense 
qualities  —  sounds,  tastes,  colors  —  and  equally  for  all  emo¬ 
tional  and  moral  qualities.  The  meanings  of '  honesty,'  ‘  sym¬ 
pathy,'  '  hatred,’  must  be  grasped  by  having  them  presented 
in  an  individual’s  first-hand  experience.  The  reaction  of 


162  HOW  WE  THINK 

educational  reformers  against  linguistic  and  bookish  train¬ 
ing  has  always  taken  the  form  of  demanding  recourse  to 
personal  experience.  However  advanced  the  person  is  in 
knowledge  and  in  scientific  training;  understanding  of  a 
new  subject,  or  of  a  new  aspect  of  an  old  subject,  must  al¬ 
ways  be  through  acts  of  experiencing  directly  or  in  imagina¬ 
tion  the  existence  of  the  quality  in  question. 

b.  Expository.  Given  a  certain  store  of  meanings  that 
have  been  directly  or  denotatively  marked  out,  language 
becomes  a  resource  by  which  imaginative  combinations  and 
variations  may  be  built  up.  A  color  may  be  defined  to  one 
who  has  not  experienced  it  as  lying  between  green  and  blue; 
a  tiger  may  be  defined  (i.e.,  the  idea  of  it  made  more  defi¬ 
nite)  by  selecting  some  qualities  from  known  members  of 
the  cat  tribe  and  combining  them  with  ideas  of  size  and 
weight  derived  from  other  objects.  Illustrations  are  of  the 
nature  of  expository  definitions;  so  are  the  accounts  of  mean¬ 
ings  given  in  a  dictionary.  By  taking  better-known  mean¬ 
ings  and  associating  them,  the  attained  store  of  meanings 
of  the  community  in  which  one  resides  is  put  at  one’s  dis¬ 
posal.  But  in  themselves  these  definitions  are  second-hand 
and  conventional;  there  is  danger  that  instead  of  inciting 
one  to  effort  after  personal  experiences  that  will  exemplify 
and  verify  them,  they  will  be  accepted  on  authority  as  sub- 
stitutes  for  direct  observation  and  experiment. 

c.  Scientific.  Even  popular  definitions  serve  as  rules  for 
identifying  and  classifying  individuals,  but  the  purpose  of 
such  identifications  and  classifications  is  mainly  practical 
and  social,  not  intellectual.  To  conceive  the  whale  as  a  fish 
does  not  interfere  with  the  success  of  whalers,  nor  does  it 
prevent  recognition  of  a  whale  when  seen,  while  to  conceive 
it  not  as  a  fish  but  as  a  mammal  serves  the  practical  end 
equally  well,  and  also  furnishes  a  much  more  valuable  prin¬ 
ciple  for  scientific  identification  and  classification.  Popular 


CONCEPTION  AND  DEFINITION  163 

definitions  select  cei-tain  fairly  obvious  traits  as  keys  to 
classification.  Scientific  definitions  select  conditions  of  cau¬ 
sation,  production,  and  generation  as  their  characteristic 
material.  The  traits  used  by  the  popular  definition  do  not 
help  us  to  understand  why  an  object  has  its  common  mean¬ 
ings  and  qualities;  they  simply  state  the  fact  that  it  does 
have  them.  Causal  and  genetic  definitions  settle  on  the  way 
an  object  is  constructed  as  giving  the  key  to  its  belonging  to 
a  certain  kind  of  objects,  They  explain  why  it  has  its  class 
or  common  traits  on  the  basis  of  its  manner  of  production. 

If,  for  example,  a  layman  of  considerable  practical  ex¬ 
perience  were  asked  what  he  meant  or  understood  by  metal, 
he  would  probably  reply  in  terms  of  the  qualities  useful  in 
recognizing  any  given  metal  and  in  the  arts.  Smoothness, 
hardness,  glossiness,  and  brilliancy,  heavy  weight  for  its 
size,  would  probably  be  included  in  his  definition,  because 
such  traits  enable  us  to  identify  specific  things  when  we  see 
and  touch  them;  the  serviceable  properties  of  capacity  for 
being  hammered  and  pulled  without  breaking;  of  being 
softened  by  heat  and  hardened  by  cold,  of  retaining  the 
shape  and  form  given,  of  resistance  to  pressure  and  decay, 
would  probably  be  included  — whether  or  not  such  terms  as 
‘  malleable  ’  or  ‘  fusible  '  were  used.  Now  a  scientific  concep¬ 
tion,  instead  of  using,  even  with  additions,  traits  of  this 
kind,  determines  meaning  on  a  different  basis.  The  present 
definition  of  metal  is  about  like  this:  Metal  means  any 
chemical  element  that  enters  into  combination  with  oxygen 
so  as  to  form  a  base;  i.e.,  a  compound  that  combines  with  an 
acid  to  form  a  salt.  This  scientific  definition  is  founded,  not 
on  directly  perceived  qualities  nor  on  directly  useful  prop¬ 
erties,  but  on  the  way  in  which  certain  things  are  causally 
related  to  other  things;  i.e.,  it  denotes  a  relation.  As  chemi¬ 
cal  concepts  become  more  and  more  those  of  relationships 
of  interaction  in  constituting  other  substances,  so  physical 


104  HOW  WE  THINK 

concepts  express  more  and  more  relations  of  operation; 
mathematicalj  functions  of  dependence  and  order  of  group¬ 
ing;  biological,  relations  of  differentiation  of  descent,  ef¬ 
fected  through  adjustment  of  various  environments;  and  ao 
on  through  the  sphere  of  the  sciences.  In  short,  our  concep¬ 
tions  attain  a  maximum  of  definite  individuality  and  of 
generality  (or  applicability)  in  the  degree  to  which  they 
show  how  things  depend  upon  one  another  or  influence  one 
another,  instead  of  expressing  the  ciualities  that  objects  pos¬ 
sess  statistically.  The  ideal  of  a  system  of  scientific  con¬ 
ceptions  is  to  attain  continuity,  freedom,  and  flexibility  of 
transition  in  passing  from  any  fact  and  meaning  to  any 
other;  this  demand  is  met  in  the  degree  in  which  we  lay 
hold  of  the  dynamic  ties  that  hold  things  together  in  a  con¬ 
tinuously  changing  process  —  a  principle  that  gives  insight 
into  mode  of  production  or  growth. 


CHAPTER  ELEVEN 


SYSTEMATIC  METHOD:  CONTROL 
OF  DATA  AND  EVIDENCE 


I.  Method  as  Deliberate  Testing  op  Facts  and  Ideas 

Judgment,  understanding,  conception  are  all  of  them  con¬ 
stituents  of  the  reflective  process  in  which  a  perplexing, 
confused,  unsettled  situation  is  transformed  into  one  that 
is  coherent,  clear,  and  decided  or  settled.  In  discussing  them 
we  have  introduced  nothing  new  in  principle  but  have  am¬ 
plified  what  was  illustrated  in  the  three  cases  set  forth  in 
Chapter  VI  and  analyzed  in  some  detail  in  Chapter  VII. 
We  shall  now  return  to  the  original  account  and  utilize  the 
added  knowledge  we  have  obtained  to  discuss  the  method 
of  reflective  activity  when  it  is  regulated  in  a  technical  and 
elaborate  way.  We  saw  in  the  first  section  of  Chapter  VI 
that  reflection  is  an  operation  in  which  facts  on  one  side 
and  meaning  on  the  other  are  elicited  through  constant  in¬ 
teraction  with  each  other.  Each  newly  discovered  fact  de¬ 
velops,  tests,  and  modifies  an  idea,  and  every  new  idea  and 
new  shade  of  an  idea  lead  to  further  inquiry,  which  brings 
to  light  new  facts,  modifying  our  understanding  of  facts 
previously  observed. 

The  discussion  in  which  we  are  now  engaging  accordingly 
has  two  sides.  One  side  concerns  method  as  it  operates  in 
gathering  and  testing  the  data  that  form  the  evidence  upon 
which  an  inference  must  rest  to  be  properly  supported  — 
method  of  control  of  observation  and  memory,  which  supply 
the  facts  upon  which  inference  proceeds.  The  other  side 


HOW  WE  THINK 


166 

concerns  the  formation  and  development  of  method  as  it 
operates  in  arriving  at  the  ideas  that  are  used  to  interpret 
the  data,  to  solve  problems,  and  to  elaborate  and  apply 
concepts.  The  two  functions,  as  we  have  seen,  accompany 
each  other.  The  improved  selection  and  discrimination  of 
pertinent  data  gives  a  better  clew  to  ideas  that  are  fruitful 
when  employed  and  to  the  tests  to  which  they  must  be  sub¬ 
mitted.  The  improvement  of  ideas  in  turn  stimulates  the 
performance  of  new  observations  and  the  collection  of  new 
data. 


The  Need  for  Systematized  Method 

Method  of  a  systematic  sort  is  required  in  order  to  safe¬ 
guard  the  operations  by  which  we  move  from  one  to  the 
other,  from  facts  to  ideas,  and  back  again  from  ideas  to  the 
facts  that  will  test  them.  Without  adequate  method  a  per¬ 
son  grabs,  as  it  were,  at  the  first  facts  that  offer  themselves; 
he  does  not  examine  them  to  see  whether  they  are  truly 
facts  or  whether,  even  though  they  be  real  facts,  they  are 
relevant  to  the  inference  that  needs  to  be  made.  On  the 
other  side,  we  are  given  to  jumping  at  the  first  solution  that 
occurs  to  us,  accepting  it  as  a  conclusion  without  examina¬ 
tion  and  test.  We  are  given  also  to  generalizing  an  idea  far 
beyond  support  by  evidence.  We  extend  it  to  new  cases  with¬ 
out  careful  study  to  see  whether  these  cases  may  not  be  so 
different  as  not  to  justify  the  generalization.  Method  is  par¬ 
ticularly  needed  in  complex  cases  and  cases  of  generaliza¬ 
tion,  in  order  to  safeguard  us  from  falling  into  these  errors. 

We  shall  first  give  an  illustration  of  the  way  in  which 
the  discovery  of  relevant  facts  on  which  to  base,  and  by 
which  to  support  and  test,  an  inferred  solution  goes  on  in 
company  with  the  formation  and  use  of  ideas  to  interpret 
the  facts. 

A  man  who  has  left  his  room  in  order  finds  it  upon  his 


CONTROL  OF  DATA  AND  EVIDENCE  167 

return  in  a  state  of  confusion,  articles  being  scattered  at 
random.  Automatically,  the  notion  comes  to  his  mind  that 
burglary  would  account  for  the  disorder.  He  has  not  seen 
the  burglars;  their  presence  is  not  a  fact  of  observation;  it 
is  a  thought,  an  idea.  The  state  of  the  room  is  a  fact,  cer¬ 
tain,  speaking  for  itself ;  the  presence  of  burglars  is  a  pos¬ 
sibility  that  may  explain  the  facts.  Moreover,  the  man  has 
no  special  burglar  in  mind.  The  state  of  his  room  is  per¬ 
ceived  and  is  particular,  definite — exactly  as  it  is;  a  burglar 
is  inferred,  But  no  particular  individual  is  thought  of; 
merely  some  indefinite,  unspecified,  member  of  a  class. 

The  original  fact,  the  room  as  it  is  first  observed,  does  not 
by  any  means  pj'ove  the  fact  of  burglary.  Tire  latter  con¬ 
jecture  may  be  correct,  but  evidence  to  justify  accepting  it 
positively  is  lacking.  The  total '  fact  ’  as  given  contains  both 
too  much  and  too  little;  too  much,  because  there  are  many 
features  in  it  that  are  irrelevant  to  inference,  that  are  there¬ 
fore  logically  superfluous.  Too  little,  because  the  considera¬ 
tions  that  are  crucial  —  that,  if  they  were  ascertained,  would 
be  decisive — -do  not  appear  on  the  surface.  Thoughtful 
search  for  the  kind  of  facts  that  are  clews  is  therefore  neces¬ 
sitated.  If  the  illustration  were  followed  out  beyond  the 
judgment  as  to  whether  there  had  been  a  burglary  to  the 
question  of  who  the  criminal  was  and  how  he  was  to  be 
discovered  and  the  crime  brought  home  to  him,  the  need  for 
extensive  and  careful  examination  of  the  fact  aide  of  the 
case  would  be  even  clearer. 

Observation  Valuable  When  Guided  by  Hypotheses 

This  search  needs  guidance.  If  it  is  conducted  purely  at 
random  a  multitude  of  facts  will  be  turned  up,  but  they  will 
be  so  unrelated  that  their  very  number  will  add  to  the  diffi¬ 
culty  of  the  case.  It  is  quite  possible  for  thinking  to  be 
swamped  by  the  mere  multiplicity  and  diversity  of  facts. 


HOW  WE  THINK 


168 

The  real  problem  is;  What  facts  are  evidence  in  this  case? 
The  search  for  evidential  facts  is  best  conducted  when  some 
suggested  possible  meaning  is  used  as  a  guide  in  exploring 
facts,  especially  in  instituting  a  hunt  for  some  fact  that 
would  point  conclusively  to  one  explanation  and  exclude  all 
others.  So  the  person  entertains  various  hypotheses.  Besides 
burglary,  there  is  the  possibility  that  some  member  of  the 
family  had  an  urgent  need  to  find  some  article  and,  being 
in  a  hurry,  had  not  taken  the  time  to  put  things  in  order 
again.  There  are  children  also  in  the  family,  and  they  are 
not  above  mischief  on  occasion.  Each  of  these  conjectured 
possibilities  is  developed  to  some  extent.  If  it  were  a  burglar, 
or  an  adult  in  a  hurry,  or  mischief  on  the  part  of  children, 
then  certain  features  characteristic  of  each  particular  cause 
would  be  present.  If  it  were  a  case  of  burglary,  then  articles 
of  value  would  be  missing.  Guided  by  this  idea,  the  person 
looks  again,  not  any  longer  at  the  scene  as  a  whole,  but 
analytically,  with  reference  to  this  one  item.  He  finds  jew- 
eliy  gone;  he  finds  that  some  silver  articles  have  been 
twisted  and  bent,  and  left  behind  as  merely  plated  wear. 
These  data  are  incompatible  with  any  hypothesis  except 
burglary.  Looking  further,  he  finds  data  that  are  most  natu¬ 
rally  interpreted  to  mean  that  a  window  has  been  tampered 
with  —  a  fact  consistent  only  with  the  action  of  a  burglar. 
Under  any  ordinary  circumstances  these  data  would  give 
adequate  evidence  of  the  visit  of  a  burglar;  if  the  conditions 
were  very  unusual,  there  would  be  nothing  but  to  continue 
thinking  of  further  possibilities  and  looking  for  further  facts 
as  data  by  which  to  test  them.  The  instance  is  taken  from 
ordinary  life.  Scientific  method  represents  the  same  sort  of 
thing  carried  on  with  greater  elaborateness,  by  means  espe¬ 
cially  of  instruments  and  apparatus  devised  for  the  purpose 
and  of  mathematical  calculations. 


CONTROL  OF  DATA  AND  EVIDENCE  169 

II.  The  Importance  op  Method  in  Judging  Data 

From  what  has  been  said  it  is  clear  that  the  formation  of 
the  idea  or  hypothesis  that  is  employed  to  interpret  data 
and  to  unify  them  into  a  coherent  situation  is  indirect.  Fun¬ 
damentally,  suggestions  just  occur  or  do  not  occur,  depend¬ 
ing,  as  we  have  seen,  on  the  state  of  culture  and  knowledge 
at  the  time;  upon  the  discernment  and  experience  and  na¬ 
tive  genius  of  the  individual ;  upon  his  recent  activities ;  to 
some  extent  upon  chance;  for  many  of  the  most  pregnant 
inventions  and  discoveries  have  come  about  almost  acci¬ 
dentally,  although  these  happy  accidents  never  happen  ex¬ 
cept  to  persons  especially  prepared  by  interest  and  prior 
thought.  But  while  the  original  happening  of  a  suggestion, 
whether  it  be  brilliant  or  stupid,  is  not  directly  controlled, 
the  acceptance  and  use  of  the  suggestion  is  capable  of  con¬ 
trol,  given  a  person  of  a  thoughtful  habit  of  mind. 

The  primary  method  of  control  is  that  indicated  in  the 
illustration.  The  person  who  is  confronted  with  the  situation 
that  has  to  be  thought  through  returns  upon,  revises,  ex¬ 
tends,  analyzes,  and  makes  more  precise  and  definite  the 
facts  of  the  case.  He  strives  to  convert  them  into  just  those 
data  which  will  test  the  suggestions  that  occur  to  mind. 
This  testing  will  take  place,  as  in  the  burglary  incident,  by 
finding  upon  examination  traits  that  are  incom'patible  with 
some  suggested  possibility  and  consistent  with  some  other. 
They  are  just  what  should  be  there  in  fact  i/that  particular 
hypothesis  is  correct.  The  ideal  of  course  is  discovery  of 
traits  that  could  be  present  only  upon  a  particular  hypothe¬ 
sis,  This  type  of  evidence  can  rarely  be  found  in  fact,  but 
it  is  approximated  by  the  methods  of  control  of  observation 
and  collection  of  data  that  have  been  found  to  work  well  in 
scientific  inquiry. 


170 


HOW  WE  THINK 


The  Interrelations  of  Observation  and  Thought 

It  will  be  noted,  then,  that  observation  is  not  an  opera¬ 
tion  that  is  opposed  to  thought  or  that  is  even  independent 
of  it.  On  the  contrary,  thoughtful  observing  is  at  least  one 
half  of  thinking,  the  other  half  being  the  entertaining  and 
elaboration  of  multiple  hypotheses.  Features  that  are  glar¬ 
ingly  conspicuous  often  need  to  be  ignored;  hidden  traits 
need  to  be  brought  to  light;  obscure  characteristics  to  be 
emphasized  and  cleared  up. 

Consider,  for  example,  how  a  physician  makes  his  diag¬ 
nosis,  his  interpretation.  If  he  is  scientifically  trained,  he 
suspends  —  postpones  —  reaching  a  conclusion  in  order  that 
he  may  not  be  led  by  superficial  occurrences  into  a  snap 
judgment.  There  are  some  facts  that  are  given  in  an  obvious 
way  to  his  observation.  But  what  is  obvious  may  be,  when 
regarded  as  an  evidential  sign,  most  misleading;  the  evi¬ 
dential  facts,  the  real  data,  may  show  themselves  only  after 
a  prolonged  search  involving  artificial  apparatus  and  a  tech¬ 
nique  that  expresses  the  methods  found  useful  by  a  whole 
body  of  experts. 

Conspicuous  phenomena  may  forcibly  suggest  typhoid, 
but  the  physician  avoids  a  conclusion  or  even  any  strong 
preference  for  this  or  that  conclusion  until  he  has  both 
greatly  enlarged  the  scope  of  his  data  and  also  rendered 
them  more  minute.  He  not  only  questions  the  patient  as  to 
his  feelings  and  as  to  his  acts  prior  to  the  disease,  but  by 
various  manipulations  with  his  hands  (and  with  instruments 
made  for  the  purpose)  brings  to  light  a  large  number  of  facts 
of  which  the  patient  is  quite  unaware.  The  state  of  tem¬ 
perature,  respiration,  and  heart  action  is  accurately  noted, 
and  their  fluctuations  from  time  to  time  are  exactly  recorded, 
Until  this  examination  has  worked  out  toward  a  wider  col¬ 
lection  and  in  toward  a  minuter  scrutiny  of  details,  in¬ 
ference  is  deferred. 


CONTROL  OF  DATA  AND  EVIDENCE  171 


Regulative  Features  of  Scientific  Method 

Scientific  method  includes,  in  short,  all  the  processes  by 
which  the  observing  and  amassing  of  data  are  regulated 
with  a  view  to  facilitating  the  formation  of  explanatory  con¬ 
ceptions  and  theories.  These  devices  are  all  directed  toward 
selecting  the  precise  facts  to  which  weight  and  signifieance 
shall  attach  in  forming  suggestions  or  ideas.  Specifically, 
this  selective  determination  involves  operations  of  (1)  elimi¬ 
nation  by  analysis  of  what  is  likely  to  be  misleading  and 
irrelevant,  (2)  emphasis  of  the  important  by  collection  and 
comparison  of  cases,  and  (3)  deliberate  construction  of  data 
by  experimental  variation. 

Elimination  of  Irrelevant  Meanings 

1.  It  is  a  common  saying  that  one  must  learn  to  discrimi¬ 
nate  between  observed  facts  and  judgments  based  upon 
them.  Taken  literally,  such  advice  cannot  be  carried  out;  in 
every  observed  thing  there  is  —  if  the  thing  have  any  mean¬ 
ing  at  all  —  some  consolidation  of  meaning  with  what  is  sen¬ 
sibly  and  physically  present,  such  that,  if  this  were  entirely 
excluded,  what  is  left  would  have  no  sense,  A  says:  “  I  saw 
my  brother.”  The  term  brother,  however,  involves  a  relation 
that  cannot  be  sensibly  or  physically  observed;  it  is  in¬ 
ferential  in  status.  If  A  contents  himself  with  saying,  “I 
saw  a  man,”  the  factor  of  classification,  of  intellectual 
reference,  is  less  complex,  but  still  exists.  If,  as  a  last  resort, 
A  were  to  say,  “Anyway,  I  saw  a  colored  object,”  some 
relationship,  though  more  rudimentary  and  undefined,  still 
subsists.  Theoretically,  it  is  possible  that  no  object  was 
there,  only  abnormal  nerve  stimulation.  None  the  less,  the 
advice  to  discriminate  what  is  observed  from  what  is  in¬ 
ferred  is  sound  practical  advice.  Its  working  import  is  that 
one  should  eliminate  or  exclude  those  inferences  as  to  which 
experience  has  shown  that  there  is  greatest  liability  to 


HOW  WE  THINK 


172 

error.  This,  of  course,  is  a  relative  matter.  Under  ordinary 
circumstances  no  reasonable  doubt  would  attach  to  the  ob¬ 
servation,  “I  see  my  brother”;  it  would  be  pedantic  and 
silly  to  resolve  this  recognition  back  into  a  more  elementary 
form.  Under  other  circumstances  it  might  be  a  perfectly 
genuine  question  as  to  whether  A  saw  even  a  colored  thing, 
or  whether  the  color  was  due  to  a  stimulation  of  the  sensory 
optical  apparatus  (like  '  seeing  stars’  upon  a  blow)  or  to  a 
disordered  circulation.  In  general,  the  scientific  man  is  one 
who  knows  that  he  is  likely  to  be  hurried  to  a  conclusion 
and  that  part  of  this  precipitancy  is  due  to  certain  habits 
that  tend  to  make  him  ‘read’  certain  meanings  into  the 
situation  that  confronts  him,  so  that  he  must  be  on  the  look¬ 
out  against  errors  arising  from  his  interests,  habits,  and 
current  preconceptions. 

The  technique  of  scientific  inquiry  thus  consists  in  various 
processes  that  tend  to  exclude  over-hasty  ‘  reading  in  ’  of 
meanings;  devices  that  aim  to  give  a  purely  ‘  objective,’  un¬ 
biased  rendering  of  the  data  to  be  interpreted.  Flushed 
cheeks  usually  mean  heightened  temperature;  paleness 
means  lowered  temperature.  The  clinical  thermometer  re¬ 
cords  automatically  the  actual  temperature  and  hence 
checks  up  the  habitual  associations  that  might  lead  to  error 
in  a  given  case.  All  the  instrumentalities  of  observation  — 
the  various  -meters  and  -graphs  and  -scopes  —  fulfil  a  part 
of  their  scientific  role  in  helping  to  eliminate  meanings  sup¬ 
plied  because  of  habit,  prejudice,  the  strong  momentary  pre¬ 
occupation  of  excitement  and  anticipation,  and  by  the  vogue 
of  existing  theories.  Photographs,  phonographs,  kymographs, 
actinographs,  seismographs,  plethysmographs,  and  the  like, 
moreover,  give  records  that  are  permanent,  so  that  they  can 
be  employed  by  different  persons,  and  by  the  same  person 
in  different  states  of  mind;  i.e.,  imder  the  influence  of  vary¬ 
ing  expectations  and  dominant  beliefs.  Thus  purely  personal 


CONTROL  OP  DATA  AND  EVIDENCE  173 

prepossessions  (due  to  habit,  to  desire,  to  after-effects  of 
recent  experience)  may  be  largely  eliminated.  In  ordinary 
language,  the  facts  are  objectively,  rather  than  subjectively, 
determined.  In  this  way  tendencies  to  premature  interpre¬ 
tation  are  held  in  check. 

Collection  of  Sufficient  Instances 

2.  Another  important  method  of  control  consists  in  the 
multiplication  of  cases  or  instances.  If  I  doubt  whether  a  cer¬ 
tain  handful  gives  a  fair  sample  or  one  representative,  for 
purposes  of  judging  value,  of  a  whole  carload  of  grain,  I  take 
a  number  of  handfuls  from  various  parts  of  the  car  and  com¬ 
pare  them.  If  they  agree  in  quality,  well  and  good;  if  they 
disagree,  we  try  to  get  enough  samples  so  that  when  they 
are  thoroughly  mixed  the  result  will  be  a  fair  basis  for  an 
evaluation.  This  illustration  represents  roughly  the  value 
of  that  aspect  of  scientific  method  that  insists  upon  multi¬ 
plying  observations  instead  of  basing  the  conclusion  upon 
one  or  a  few  cases. 

So  prominent,  indeed,  is  this  aspect  of  method  at  a  cer¬ 
tain  stage  of  its  development  that  it  is  frequently  treated  as 
constituting  induction.  It  is  supposed  that  all  controlled 
inference  as  to  matters  of  fact  is  based  upon  collecting  and 
comparing  a  number  of  like  cases.  Actually  such  comparison 
and  collection  is  a  secondary  development  within  the  process 
of  securing  a  correct  conclusion  in  some  single  case.  If  a 
man  infers  from  one  sample  of  grain  as  to  the  grade  of 
wheat  of  the  car  as  a  whole,  it  is  induction  and,  under  cer¬ 
tain  circumstances,  namely,  if  the  entire  bulk  has  been 
thoroughly  mixed,  it  is  a  sound  induction.  Other  cases  are 
resorted  to  simply  for  the  sake  of  rendering  a  suggested  in¬ 
ference  more  guarded,  and  more  probably  correct.  In  like 
fashion,  the  reasoning  that  led  up  to  the  burglary  idea  in 
the  instance  already  cited,  the  particulars  upon  which  the 


HOW  WE  THINK 


174 

general  meaning  (or  relation)  of  burglary  was  grounded, 
were  simply  the  sum  total  of  the  unlike  items  and  qualities 
that  made  up  the  one  case  examined.  Had  this  case  presented 
very  great  obscurities  and  difficulties,  recourse  might  then 
have  been  had  to  examination  of  a  number  of  similar  cases, 
But  this  comparison  would  not  introduce  scientific  method 
into  a  process  that  was  not  previously  of  that  character;  it 
would  only  render  inference  more  war-y  and  adequate.  The 
object  of  bringing  into  consideration  a  multitude  of  cases  is 
to  facilitate  the  selection  of  the  evidential  or  significant  fea¬ 
tures  upon  which  to  base  inference  in  some  single  case. 

Unlikenesa  as  Important  as  Likeness  in  These  Instances 

Accordingly,  points  of  unlikeness  are  as  important  aa 
points  of  Hfceness  among  the  cases  examined.  Comparison, 
without  contrast,  does  not  amount  to  anything  logically.  In 
the  degree  in  which  other  cases  observed  or  remembered 
merely  duplicate  the  case  in  question,  we  are  no  better  off 
for  purposes  of  inference  than  if  we  had  permitted  our  single 
original  fact  to  dictate  a  conclusion.  In  the  case  of  various 
samples  of  grain,  it  is  the  fact  that  samples  are  different, 
at  least  as  to  the  place  of  the  carload  from  which  they  are 
taken,  that  is  important.  Were  it  not  for  this  difference,  like¬ 
ness  in  quality  would  be  of  no  avail  in  controlling  infer¬ 
ence.^  If  we  are  endeavoring  to  get  a  child  to  regulate  his 
conclusions  about  the  germination  of  a  seed  by  taking  into 
account  a  number  of  instances,  very  little  is  gained  if  the 
conditions  in  all  these  instances  closely  approximate  one 
another,  But  if  one  seed  is  placed  in  pure  sand,  another  in 
loam,  and  another  on  blotting  paper,  and  if  in  each  case  there 

r  In  terma  of  the  phrases  used  in  logical  treatises,  the  so-called 
‘methods  of  agreement’  (oompurison)  and  ‘difference’  (contrast) 
must  accompany  each  other  or  constitute  a  ‘joint  method’  in  order 
to  be  of  logical  use. 


CONTROL  OF  DATA  AND  EVIDENCE  175 

are  two  conditions,  one  with  and  another  without  moisture, 
the  unlike  factors  tend  to  throw  into  relief  the  factors  that 
are  significant  (or  '  essential  ’)  for  reaching  a  conclusion. 
Unless,  in  short,  the  observer  takes  care  to  have  the  dif¬ 
ferences  in  the  observed  cases  as  extreme  as  conditions  allow, 
and  unless  he  notes  unlikenesses  as  carefully  as  likenesses, 
he  has  no  way  of  determining  the  evidential  force  of  the 
data  that  confront  him. 

Another  way  of  bringing  out  this  importance  of  unlikeness 
is  the  emphasis  put  by  the  scientist  upon  negative  cases  — 
upon  instances  that,  it  would  seem,  ought  to  fall  into  line 
but  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  do  not.  Anomalies,  exceptions, 
things  that  agree  in  most  respects  but  disagree  in  some 
crucial  point,  are  so  important  that  many  of  the  devices  of 
scientific  technique  are  designed  purely  to  detect,  record,  and 
impress  upon  memory  contrasting  cases.  Darwin  remarked 
that,  so  easy  is  it  to  pass  over  cases  that  oppose  a  favorite 
generalization,  he  had  made  it  a  habit,  not  merely  to  hunt 
for  contrary  instances,  but  also  to  write  down  any  excep¬ 
tion  he  noted  or  thought  of  —  as  otherwise  it  was  almost 
sure  to  be  forgotten. 

Experimental  Variation  of  Conditions 

3.  We  have  already  touched  upon  this  factor  of  control 
of  method,  the  one  that  is  the  most  important  of  all  wherever 
it  is  feasible.  Theoretically,  one  sample  case  0/  the  right 
kind  will  be  as  good  a  basis  for  an  inference  as  a  thousand 
cases;  but  cases  of  the  right  kind  rarely  turn  up  spon¬ 
taneously.  We  have  to  search  for  them,  and  we  may  have  to 
make  them.  If  we  take  cases  just  as  we  find  them  —  whether 
one  case  or  many  cases  —  they  contain  much  that  is  irrele¬ 
vant  to  the  problem  in  hand,  while  much  that  is  relevant  is 
obscure,  hidden.  The  object  of  experimentation  is  the  con¬ 
struction,  hy  regular  steps  taken  on  the  basis  oj  a  plan 


HOW  WE  THINK 


176 

thought  out  in  advance,  of  a  typical,  crucial  case,  a  case 
formed  with  express  reference  to  throwing  light  on  the  diffi¬ 
culty  in  question.  All  methods  on  the  fact  side  rest,  as 
already  stated,®  upon  regulation  of  the  conditions  of  observa¬ 
tion  and  memory;  experiment  is  simply  the  moat  adequate 
regulation  of  these  conditions  that  is  possible.  We  try  to 
make  the  observation  such  that  every  factor  entering  into 
it,  together  with  the  mode  and  the  amount  of  its  operation, 
may  be  open  to  recognition.  Making  observations  open, 
overt,  precise,  constitutes  experiment. 

Three  Advantages  of  Experiment.  Such  observations  have 
many  and  obvious  advantages  over  observations  —  no  mat¬ 
ter  how  extensive  —  with  respect  to  which  we  simply  wait 
for  an  event  to  happen  or  an  object  to  present  itself.  Experi¬ 
ment  overcomes  defects  due  to  (a)  the  rarity,  (b)  the  sub¬ 
tlety  and  minuteness  (or  the  violence),  and  (c)  the  rigid 
fixity  of  facts  as  we  ordinarily  experience  them.  The  follow¬ 
ing  quotations  from  Jevons’s  Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic 
bring  out  all  these  points: 

We  might  have  to  wait  years  or  centuries  to  meet  acci¬ 
dentally  with  facts  which  we  can  readily  produce  at  any 
moment  in  a  laboratory;  and  it  is  probable  that  most  of  the 
chemical  substances  now  known  and  many  excessively  useful 
products  would  never  have  been  discovered  at  all  by  waiting 
tin  nature  presented  them  spontaneously  to  our  observation. 

This  quotation  refers  to  the  infrequency,  or  rarity,  of 
certain  facts  of  nature,  even  very  important  ones.  The  pas¬ 
sage  then  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  minuteness  of  many  phe¬ 
nomena  that  makes  them  escape  ordinary  experience: 

Electricity  doubtless  operates  in  every  particle  of  matter, 
perhaps  at  every  moment  of  time;  and  even  the  ancients  could 


2  See  page  106. 


CONTROL  OP  DATA  AND  EVIDENCE  177 

not  but  notice  its  action  in  the  loadstone,  in  lightning,  in  the 
Aurora  Borealis,  or  in  a  piece  of  rubbed  amber.  But  in  light¬ 
ning  electricity  was  too  intense  and  dangerous;  in  the  other 
cases  it  was  too  feeble  to  be  properly  understood.  The  science 
of  electricity  and  magnetism  could  only  advance  by  getting 
regular  supplies  of  electricity  from  the  common  electric  ma¬ 
chine  or  the  galvanic  battery  and  by  making  powerful  electro¬ 
magnets.  Most,  if  not  all,  the  effects  which  electricity  produces 
must  go  on  in  nature,  but  altogether  too  obscurely  for 
observation. 

Jevons  then  deals  with  the  fact  that,  under  ordinary  con¬ 
ditions  of  experience,  phenomena  that  can  be  understood 
only  by  seeing  them  under  varying  conditions  are  presented 
in  a  fixed  and  uniform  way. 

Thus  carbonic  acid  is  only  met  in  the  form  of  a  gas,  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  the  combustion  of  carbon;  but  when  exposed  to 
extreme  pressure  and  cold,  it  is  condensed  into  a  liquid,  and 
may  even  be  converted  into  a  snowlike  solid  substance.  Many 
other  gases  have  in  like  manner  been  liquefied  or  solidified, 
and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  every  substance  is  capable 
of  taking  all  three  forms  of  solid,  liquid,  and  gas,  if  only  the 
conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure  can  be  sufficiently 
varied,  Mere  observation  of  nature  would  have  led  us,  on  the 
contrary,  to  suppose  that  nearly  all  substances  were  fixed  in 
one  condition  only,  and  could  not  be  converted  from  solid  into 
liquid  and  from  liquid  into  gas. 

Many  volumes  would  be  required  to  describe  in  detail 
all  the  methods  that  investigators  have  developed  in  various 
subjects  for  analyzing  and  restating  the  facts  of  ordinary 
experience  so  that  we  may  escape  from  capricious  and  rou¬ 
tine  suggestions  and  may  get  the  facta  in  such  a  form  and  in 
such  a  light  (or  context)  that  exact  and  far-reaching  ex¬ 
planations  may  be  suggested  in  place  of  vague  and  limited 


HOW  WE  THINK 


178 

ones.  But  these  various  devices  of  inductive  inquiry  all  have 
one  goal  in  view:  the  indirect  regulation  of  the  function  of 
suggestions,  or  formation  of  ideas ;  and,  in  the  main,  they  will 
be  found  to  reduce  to  some  combination  of  the  three  types 
of  selecting  and  arranging  subject  matter  just  described. 


CHAPTER  TWELVE 


SYSTEMATIC  METHOD:  CONTROL 
OF  REASONING  AND  CONCEPTS 


I,  The  Value  op  Scientipic  Conceptions 

We  have  already  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  control 
of  observation  and  memory  so  as  to  select  and  give  proper 
weight  to  data  as  evidence  depends  upon  the  possession  of 
a  store  of  standardized  meanings,  or  conceptions.  If,  in  the 
case  of  the  disordered  room,  the  person  did  not  have  in  hand 
fairly  definite  conceptions  of  burglary,  mischief,  etc.,  he 
would  have  been  as  much  at  a  loss  in  interpreting  the  scene 
that  met  his  eyes  as  a  little  child  would  have  beenilConcep- 
tions  are  the  intellectual  instrumentalities  that  are  brought 
to  bear  upon  the  material  of  sense  perception  and  of  recol¬ 
lection  in  order  to  clarify  the  obscure,  to  bring  order  into 
seeming  conflict,  and  unity  into  the  fragmentary|  In  the 
case  of  the  physician’s  diagnosis,  dependence  upon  the  fund 
of  already  possessed  knowledge  is  even  more  evident  as  well 
as  complete.  It  is  an  old  story  that  we  know  with  what  we 
already  know  or  have  mastered  intellectually  .(And  '  achieved 
understanding,’  ‘  established  and  solid  meaning,’  and  ‘  con¬ 
ception  ’  are  synonymous  terms.  Hence  the  necessity  for  the 
regulated  control  of  their  formation. 

The  Basic  Importance  of  System  in  Concepts 

We  dealt  previously  with  the  way  in  which  conceptions 
come  into  existence.  We  have  now  to  consider  the  method 
by  which  a  secure  serial  development  of  conceptions,  one 


HOW  WE  THINK 


180 

leading  to  another  in  regular  sequence,  is  brought  about. 
The  important  consideration  here  is  the  basic  importance 
of  relations  between  conceptions,  of  system} 

A  concept  may  be  excellent  for  the  purpose  of  identifying 
events  that  frequently  recur  in  our  experience,  even  if  it  ig 
not  placed  in  a  system  or  related  body  of  concepts.  Thus  a 
person  can  identify  a  given  four-legged  animal  as  a  dog, 
even  though  the  concept  of  '  dog  ’  is  not  part  of  a  system  of 
concepts  such  as  forms  the  science  of  zoology:  But  there  are 
other  problems  of  animal  life  that  cannot  possibly  be  solved 
by  the  everyday  conception  of  ‘  dog,’  problems  that  require 
a  serial  order  of  concepts:  wolf-family,  vertebrate,  mammal, 
and  a  knowledge  of  the  relations  of  mammal  to  birds, 
reptiles,  etc. 

The  importance  of  the  connections  that  bind  concepts  to¬ 
gether  into  a  whole  is  indicated  by  the  words  that  we  use  to 
express  the  relation  of  premises  and  conclusions  to  each 
other.  (1)  The  premises  are  called  grounds,  foundations, 
bases,  and  are  said  to  underlie,  uphold,  support  the  conclu¬ 
sion.  (2)  We  '  descend  ’  from  the  premises  to  the  conclu¬ 
sion,  and  '  ascend  ’  in  the  opposite  direction  —  as  a  river 
may  be  continuously  traced  from  source  to  sea  or  vice 
versa.  So  the  conclusion  springs,  flows,  or  is  drawn  from  its 
premises.  (3)  The  conclusion  —  as  the  word  itself  implies — 
closes,  shuts  in,  locks  up  together  the  various  factors  stated 
in  the  premises.  We  say  that  the  premises  ‘contain’  the 
conclusion,  and  that  the  conclusion  '  contains  ’  the  premises, 
thereby  marking  our  sense  of  the  inclusive  and  comprehen¬ 
sive  unity  in  which  the  elements  of  reasoning  are  bound 
tightly  together. 

Popular  concepts,  like  the  ordinary  one  of  a  dog,  are  based 
on  fairly  obvious  qualities,  qualities  that  anyone  having  the 
normal  use  of  his  senses  can  readily  perceive.  But  these 
1  See  page  112. 


CONTROL  OR  REASONING  181 

popular  concepts  do  not  take  us  very  far;  they  are  extended 
or  generalized  to  include  cases  outwardly  different  only 
with  great  risk.  They  are  responsible  for  such  generaliza¬ 
tions  as  calling  a  bat  a  ‘  bird,’  and  a  whale  a  ‘  fish.’  They 
not  only  lead  us  astray,  but  they  also  stop  far  short  of  such 
generalizations  as  those  that  are  basic  and  almost  common¬ 
place  in  science  —  electron,  atom,  moleeule,  mass,  energy, 
etc.  And  it  is  this  latter  kind  of  concept  that  furthers  dis¬ 
covery,  invention,  and  the  control  of  the  forces  of  nature. 

Value  of  the  Concepts  of  Quantity 

One  of  the  great  conquests  of  natural  science  has  been 
effected  by  the  development  of  mathematical  concepts  in  a 
form  applicable  to  observation  and  interpretation  of  natural 
events.  Take  for  example  the  concepts  of  quantity  and 
measurement.  We  can  unite  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
popular  concept  such  qualities  as  red,  green,  blue,  etc.,  by 
bringing  them  together  in  the  concept  of  color.  But  we  can 
make  much  more  exact  and  extensive  inferences  regarding 
color  when  we  use  the  concept  of  rates  of  vibration.  We  can 
then  relate  color  phenomena  to  other  events  apparently  of  a 
totally  different  kind  —  infra-red  and  ultra-violet,  radio¬ 
active  phenomena,  sound,  electro-magnetism,  etc.  Through 
the  use  of  the  concepts  of  quantity  we  can  ignore  the  dif¬ 
ferences  of  quality  which  mark  off  things  from  one  another 
and  hence  arrest  inference.  Consequently  we  can  go  from  one 
fact  to  another  to  an  almost  indefinite  extent  if  we  treat 
them  all  as  exhibiting  measured  differences  of  quantity. 

Distinctive  Standard  Concepts  Established  in  Each  Science 

Every  branch  of  science,  geology,  zoology,  chemistry, 
physics,  astronomy,  as  well  as  the  different  branches  of 
mathematics,  arithmetic,  algebra,  calculus,  etc.,  aims  at 
establishing  its  own  specialized  set  of  concepts  that  are 


HOW  WE  THINK 


182 

keys  to  understanding  the  phenomena  that  are  classified  ia 
each  field.  In  this  way  there  is  provided  for  every  typical 
branch  of  subiect  matter  a  set  of  meanings  and  principles 
so  closely  interknit  that  any  one  implies  some  other,  ac¬ 
cording  to  definite  conditions,  that,  under  certain  other  con¬ 
ditions,  implies  another,  and  so  on.  In  this  way,  substitutions 
of  equivalent  meanings  are  possible,  and  reasoning,  without 
having  recourse  to  specific  observations,  can  trace  out  very 
remote  consequences  of  any  principle  that  is  suggested. 
Definition,  general  formulae,  and  classification  are  the  de¬ 
vices  by  which  the  fixation  of  a  meaning  and  its  elaboration 
into  its  ramifications  are  carried  on.  They  are  not  ends  in 
themselves  —  as  they  are  frequently  regarded  even  in  ele¬ 
mentary  education  —  but  instrumentalities  for  facilitating 
understanding,  aids  to  the  interpretation  of  the  obscure  and 
the  explanation  of  the  puzzling.  Moreover,  a  conception 
that,  in  the  form  in  which  it  first  presents  itself,  is  not  appli¬ 
cable  to  the  situation  may  have  implied  meanings  that  are 
readily  applicable  —  as  the  rise  of  water  or  mercury  in  a 
vacuum  is  explained  by  developing  the  implications  of 
weight  and  of  the  fact  that  air  has  weight.  Again,  the  original 
concept  may  be  quite  limited  in  its  application,  while  energy 
will  be  conserved  if  the  implied  ideas  traced  out  by  reason¬ 
ing  have  wider  application  than  the  original  idea  had. 

Playing  with  Concepts 

To  the  specialist,' conceptual  meanings  become  a  subject 
matter  of  their  own.  It  is  an  intellectual  satisfaction  to  de¬ 
velop  them  in  their  logical  relations  of  interdependence,  of 
implication,  without  any  reference  at  all  to  their  immediate 
or  even  ulterior  application  to  actual  existence.  To  the 
trained  mathematician,  for  example,  nothing  is  more  fas¬ 
cinating  than  to  follow  out  the  relations  of  concepts  and,  by 
discovering  unexpected  relations  among  them,  see  them  un- 


CONTROL  OF  REASONING  1S3 

fold  into  a  harmonious  system  whose  contemplation  gives 
great  esthetic  satisfaction.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  playing 
with  ideas. 

It  is  possible  for  this  form  of  sport  to  become  much  more 
absorbing  than  is  playing  games  with  things.  No  one,  it  is 
safe  to  say,  has  ever  become  distinguished  as  a  thinker  in 
any  held  of  science  or  philosophy  who  did  not  have  an 
absorbing  interest  in  the  relations  of  ideas  for  their  own 
sake.  Many  children  are  much  more  capable  of  playing  with 
ideas  (provided  they  are  within  the  range  of  their  un¬ 
derstanding)  than  is  usually  believed.  Constraint  arising 
from  external  imposition  dulls  this  power  and  often  turns 
into  concealed  daydreaming  and  fantasy-building  what, 
under  happier  circumstances,  would  be  an  interest  in  con¬ 
necting  meanings  with  one  another  and  a  delight  in  coming 
upon  unexpected  combinations.  One  of  the  great  values  of 
creative  work,  as  in  writing,  painting,  or  any  art,  is  that 
it  promotes  a  constructive,  although  unconscious,  playing 
with  meanings  in  their  relations. 

Need  of  Final  Test  of  Concepts 

Although  conceptions  are  capable  of  development  with¬ 
out  reference  to  direct  observation,  and  although  the 
habit  of  tracing  their  connection  with  one  another  as  just 
ideas  or  meaning  is  absolutely  indispensable  to  the  growth 
of  science  and  to  high  personal  intellectual  cultivation,  yet 
the  final  test  lies  in  the  data  furnished  by  experimental  ob¬ 
servation.  Elaboration  by  reasoning  may  make  a  suggested 
idea  very  rich  and  very  plausible,  but  it  will  not  settle  the  va¬ 
lidity  of  that  idea.  Only  when  facts  are  observed  (by  meth¬ 
ods  either  of  collection  or  of  experimentation)  that  agree  in 
detail  and  without  exception  with  theoretical  results,  are  we 
justified  in  accepting  the  rational  conclusion  as  a  conclusion 
that  is  valid  for  actual  things.  Thinking,  in  short,  must  end 


HOW  WE  THINK 


184 

as  well  as  begin  in  the  domain  of  concrete  observations  if  it 
is  to  be  complete  thinking.  And  the  ultimate  educative  value 
of  all  deductive  processes  is  measured  by  the  degree  to 
which  they  become  working  tools  in  the  creation  and  de¬ 
velopment  of  new  experiences. 

II.  Significant  Applications  to  Education: 

GHAnACTEniaTic  Inadequacies 

Some  of  the  points  that  have  been  made  may  be  clinched 
by  considering  their  bearing  upon  instruction  and  learning, 
We  shall  go  back  to  the  statement  made  earlier  “  about  the 
correlative  character  of  fact  and  meaning,  observation  and 
conception.  For  most  of  the  educational  mistakes  about  con¬ 
cepts,  definition,  and  generalization  result  from  making  a 
false  separation  between  facts  and  meanings.  In  this  separa¬ 
tion,  '  facts  ’  become  a  dead  weight  of  undigested,  mechani¬ 
cal,  largely  verbal,  so-called  ‘  information/  while  ideas 
become  so  remote  from  objects  and  acts  of  experience  that 
they  are  empty.  Instead  of  being  means  for  better  under¬ 
standing,  they  become  themselves  incomprehensible  mys¬ 
teries,  which  for  some  unexplained  reason  haunt  the 
schoolroom  but  do  not  belong  anywhere  else. 

Isolation  of  Facts  from  Meaning 

In  some  school  subjects  and  in  many  topics  and  lessons, 
pupils  are  immersed  in  mere  details.  Their  minds  are  loaded 
with  disconnected  piecemeal  items  that  are  accepted  on 
hearsay  or  authority.  They  may  even  be  drawn  from  ob¬ 
servation  in  so-called  '  object-lessons '  if  what  is  observed 
stands  as  an  isolated  thing,  and  no  attempt  is  made  to  in¬ 
terpret  it  by  placing  it  in  relation  to  what  it  does,  how  it 
was  caused,  and  what  it  stands  for.  It  is  not  enough  to  load 
2  See  page  104. 


CONTROL  OF  REASONING  185 

the  memory  with  statement  of  facts  and  laws  and  then 
hope  that  later  in  life  by  some  magic  the  mind  will  find 
a  use  for  them.  Even  general  principles,  when  merely 
memorized,  stand  on  the  same  level  as  bare  particular  facts. 
Since  they  are  not  used  either  in  understanding  actual  ob¬ 
jects  and  events  or  in  giving  rise,  through  what  they  imply, 
to  other  conceptual  meanings,  they  are,  to  the  mind  that 
memorizes  them  (falsely  called  learning),  mere  arbitrary 
items  of  information. 

In  laboratory  instruction  in  higher  education  as  well  as  in 
object  lessons  in  elementary  education,  the  subject  is  often 
so  treated  that  the  student  fails  to  “  see  the  forest  on  account 
of  the  trees.”  Things  and  their  qualities  are  retailed  and 
detailed,  without  reference  to  a  more  general  character  that 
they  stand  for  and  mean.  In  the  laboratory  the  student  be¬ 
comes  engrossed  in  the  processes  of  manipulation,  irrespec¬ 
tive  of  the  reason  for  their  performance,  without  recognizing 
a  typical  problem  for  the  solution  of  which  they  afford  the 
appropriate  method.  Only  deduction  or  reasoning  brings 
out  and  emphasizes  consecutive  relationships,  and  only 
when  relationships  are  held  in  view  does  learning  become 
more  than  a  miscellaneous  scrap  bag. 

Failure  to  Follow  Up  by  Reasoning 

Again,  the  mind  is  allowed  to  hurry  on  to  a  vague  notion 
of  the  whole  of  which  the  fragmentary  facts  are  portions, 
without  any  attempt  to  become  conscious  of  how  they  are 
bound  together  as  parts  of  this  whole.  The  student  feels  that 
‘  in  a  general  way,’  as  we  say,  the  facts  of  the  history  or 
geography  lesson  are  related  thus  and  so;  but '  in  a  general 
way '  here  stands  only  for  ‘  in  a  vague  way,'  somehow  or 
other,  with  no  clear  recognition  of  just  how. 

The  pupil  may  be  encouraged  to  form,  on  the  basis  of  the 
jjarticular  facts,  a  general  notion,  a  conception  of  how  they 


HOW  WE  THINK 


186 

stand  related,  but  no  pains  be  taken  to  make  the  student 
follow  up  the  notion,  to  elaborate  it  and  see  just  what  its 
bearings  are  upon  the  case  in  hand  and  upon  similar  cases, 
The  inductive  inference,  the  guess,  is  formed  by  the  student; 
if  it  happens  to  be  correct,  it  is  at  once  accepted  by  the 
teacher;  or  if  it  is  false,  it  ia  rejected.  If  any  amplification 
of  the  idea  occurs,  it  is  quite  likely  carried  through  by  the 
teacher,  who  thereby  assumes  the  responsibility  for  its  in¬ 
tellectual  development.  But  a  complete,  an  integral,  act  of 
thought  requires  that  the  person  making  the  suggestion  (the 
guess)  be  responsible  also  for  reasoning  out  its  bearings  upon 
the  problem  in  hand,  for  developing  the  suggestion  enough 
at  least  to  indicate  the  ways  in  which  it  applies  to  and  ac¬ 
counts  for  the  specific  data  of  the  case.  Too  often  when  a 
recitation  does  not  consist  in  simply  testing  the  ability  of 
the  student  to  display  some  form  of  technical  skill  or  to 
repeat  facts  and  principles  accepted  on  authority,  the 
teacher  goes  to  the  opposite  extreme;  and  after  calling  out 
the  spontaneous  reflections  of  the  pupils,  their  guesses  or 
ideas  about  the  matter,  merely  accepts  or  rejects  them,  as¬ 
suming  himself  the  responsibility  for  their  elaboration.  In 
this  way,  the  function  of  suggestion  and  of  interpretation  is 
excited,  but  it  is  not  directed  and  trained.  Suggestion  ia 
stimulated  but  is  not  carried  over  into  the  reasoning  phase 
necessary  to  complete  it. 

In  other  subjects  and  topics,  the  reasoning  phase  is 
isolated,  and  ia  treated  as  if  it  were  complete  in  itself.  This 
false  isolation  may  show  itself  in  either  (and  both)  of  two 
points;  namely,  at  the  beginning  or  at  the  end  of  the  resort 
to  general  intellectual  procedure. 

Isolation  of  Deduction  by  Commencing  with  It 

Beginning  with  definitions,  rules,  general  principles,  classi¬ 
fications,  and  the  like,  is  a  common  form  of  the  first  error. 


CONTROL  OF  REASONING  187 

This  method  has  been  such  a  uniform  object  of  attack  on  the 
part  of  all  educational  reformers  that  it  is  not  necessary  to 
dwell  upon  it  further  than  to  note  that  the  mistake  is,  logi¬ 
cally,  due  to  the  attempt  to  introduce  deductive  considera¬ 
tions  without  first  making  acquaintance  with  the  particular 
facts  that  create  a  need  for  definition  and  generalization. 
Unfortunately,  the  reformer  sometimes  carries  his  objection 
too  far  or,  rather,  locates  it  in  the  wrong  place.  He  is  led  into 
a  tirade  against  all  definition,  all  systematization,  all  use 
of  general  principles,  instead  of  confining  himself  to  pointing 
out  their  futility  and  their  deadness  when  not  properly  moti¬ 
vated  by  familiarity  with  concrete  experiences.  Moreover,  a 
flat  statement  of  a  general  principle  may  properly  come 
at  the  beginning,  provided  it  is  used  to  challenge  attention 
and  not  to  close  inquiry. 

Isolation  of  Conceptions  from  Direction  of  New  Observations 

The  isolation  of  general  ideas  is  found  at  the  other  end 
wherever  there  is  failure  to  clinch  and  test  the  results  of  the 
general  reasoning  processes  by  application  to  new  concrete 
cases.  The  final  point  of  the  rational  devices  lies  in  their  use 
in  assimilating  and  comprehending  individual  cases.  No  one 
understands  a  general  principle  fully  —  no  matter  how  ade¬ 
quately  he  can  demonstrate  it,  to  say  nothing  of  repeating 
it  —  till  he  can  employ  it  in  the  mastery  of  new  situations, 
which,  if  they  are  new,  differ  in  manifestation  from  the  cases 
used  in  reaching  the  generalization.  Too  often  the  student 
and  teacher  are  contented  with  a  series  of  somewhat  per¬ 
functory  examples  and  illustrations,  and  the  student  is  not 
forced  to  carry  the  principle  that  he  has  formulated  over 
into  further  cases  of  his  own  experience.  In  so  far,  the  prin¬ 
ciple  is  inert  and  dead;  it  does  not  move  into  new  facts  or 
ideas. 


188 


HOW  WE  THINK 


Failure  to  Provide  for  Experimentation 

It  is  only  a  variation  upon  this  same  theme  to  say  that 
every  complete  act  of  reflective  inquiry  makes  provision  for 
experimentation — ^for  testing  suggested  and  accepted  prin¬ 
ciples  by  employing  them  for  the  active  construction  of  new 
casesj  in  which  new  qualities  emerge.  Only  slowly  do  our 
schools  accommodate  themselves  to  the  general  advance  of 
scientific  method.  From  the  scientific  aide,  it  is  demonstrated 
that  effective  and  integral  thinking  is  possible  only  where 
the  experimental  method  in  some  form  is  used.  Some  recog¬ 
nition  of  this  principle  is  evinced  in  higher  institutions  of 
learning,  colleges,  and  high  schools.  But  in  elementary  edu¬ 
cation,  it  is  still  assumed,  for  the  moat  part,  that  the  pupil’s 
natural  range  of  observations,  supplemented  by  what  he 
accepts  on  hearsay,  is  adequate  for  intellectual  growth.  Of 
course  it  is  not  necessary  that  laboratories  shall  be  intro¬ 
duced  under  that  name,  much  less  that  elaborate  apparatus 
be  secured;  but  the  entire  scientific  history  of  humanity 
demonstrates  that  the  conditions  for  complete  mental  ac¬ 
tivity  do  not  exist  unless  adequate  provision  is  made  for 
carrying  on  activities  that  actually  modify  physical  condi¬ 
tions,  and  that  books,  pictures,  and  even  objects,  that  are 
passively  observed  but  not  manipulated  do  not  furnish  the 
required  provision. 

The  counterpart  error  has  already  been  touched  upon, 
In  some  ‘  progressive  ’  schools,  continual  outward  activity, 
even  though  of  a  somewhat  random  and  disconnected  charac¬ 
ter,  is  treated  as  if  it  were  experimentation.  In  truth,  every 
genuine  experiment  involves  a  problem  in  which  something 
must  be  found  out  and  where  overt  action  must  be  guided 
by  an  idea  used  as  a  working  hypothesis  so  as  to  give  action 
purpose  and  point. 


CONTROL  OF  REASONING 


189 


Failure  to  Suimnarize  Net  Accomplishment 

In  Buch  schools  there  is  also  a  tendency  to  overlook  the 
need  of  constant  review,  in  the  sense  of  looking  back  over 
what  has  been  done  and  has  been  found  out,  so  as  to  formu¬ 
late  the  net  outcome,  thus  getting  mentally  rid  of  debris,  of 
all  material  and  acts  that  do  not  sustain  the  outcome,  Just 
because  too  explicit  formulation  and  organization  should 
not  come  at  the  beginning,  it  is  so  much  the  more  necessary 
that  the  ongoing  process  of  experience  should  be  periodi¬ 
cally  arrested  to  make  a  survey  of  what  has  been  going  on 
and  to  secure  a  summary  of  its  net  accomplishment.  Other¬ 
wise  loose  and  disorderly  habits  are  promoted. 


OHAPTEB  THIETEEN 


EMPIRICAL  AND  SCIENTIFIC 
THOUGHT 


I.  What  Is  Meant  by  Empibical 

Many  of  our  ordinary  inferences,  in  fact  all  of  them  that 
have  not  been  regulated  by  scientific  method,  are  empirical 
in  character;  that  is  to  say,  they  are  in  effect  habits  of  ex¬ 
pectation  based  upon  some  regular  conjunction  or  coinci¬ 
dence  in  the  experience  of  the  past,  Whenever  two  things  are 
associated  together,  like,  say,  thunder  and  lightning,  there 
is  a  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  mind  to  expect  that,  when  one 
occurs,  the  other  will  happen  too.  When  the  conjunction  is 
frequently  repeated,  the  tendency  to  expect  becomes  a  posi¬ 
tive  belief  that  the  things  are  so  connected  that  it  is  safe 
to  reason  that  when  one  happens,  the  other  is  sure,  or  almost 
sure,  to  accompany  it. 

For  example,  A  says,  "  It  will  probably  rain  to-morrow.” 
B  asks,  “  Why  do  you  think  so?  ”  and  A  replies,  "  Because 
the  sky  was  lowering  at  sunset.”  When  B  asks,  "  What  has 
that  to  do  with  it?  ”  A  responds,  “  I  don’t  know,  but  it  gen¬ 
erally  does  rain  after  such  a  sunset.”  He  does  not  know  of 
any  objective  connection  between  the  appearance  of  the 
sky  and  coming  rain;  he  is  not  aware  of  any  continuity  in 
the  facts  themselves  —  any  law  or  principle,  as  we  usually 
say.  From  frequently  recurring  conjunctions  of  the  two 
events,  he  has  associated  them  so  that,  when  he  sees  one, 
he  thinks  of  the  other.  One  suggests  the  other  or  is  asso¬ 
ciated  with  it,  A  man  may  believe  it  will  rain  to-morrow 


empirical  and  scientific  Thought  191 

because  he  has  consulted  the  barometer;  but  if  he  has  no 
conception  how  the  height  of  the  mercury  column  (or  the 
position  of  an  index  moved  by  its  rise  and  fall)  is  con¬ 
nected  with  variations  of  atmospheric  pressure,  and  how 
these  in  turn  are  connected  with  a  tendency  toward  pre¬ 
cipitation,  his  belief  in  the  likelihood  of  rain  is  purely  em¬ 
pirical.  When  men  lived  in  the  open  and  got  their  living 
by  hunting,  fishing,  or  pasturing  flocks,  the  detection  of  the 
signs  and  indications  of  weather  changes  was  a  matter  of 
great  importance.  A  body  of  proverbs  and  maxims,  forming 
an  extensive  section  of  traditionary  folklore,  was  developed. 
But  as  long  as  there  was  no  understanding  why  or  how  cer¬ 
tain  events  were  signs,  as  long  as  foresight  and  weather 
shrewdness  rested  simply  upon  repeated  conjunction  among 
facta,  beliefs  about  the  weather  were  thoroughly  empirical. 

Empirical  Thinking  Is  Useful  in  Some  Matters 

In  similar  fashion  wise  men  in  the  Orient  learned  to  pre¬ 
dict,  with  considerable  accuracy,  the  recurrent  positions  of 
the  planets,  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  to  foretell  the  time 
of  eclipses,  without  understanding  in  any  degree  the  laws 
of  the  movements  of  heavenly  bodies  —  that  is,  without 
having  a  notion  of  the  continuities  existing  among  the  facta 
themselves.  They  had  learned  from  repeated  observations 
that  things  happened  in  about  such  and  such  a  fashion.  Till 
a  comparatively  recent  time,  the  truths  of  medicine  were 
mainly  in  the  same  condition.  Experience  had  shown  that 
'  upon  the  whole,’  '  as  a  rule,’ '  generally  or  usually  speak¬ 
ing,’  certain  results  followed  certain  remedies,  when  certain 
symptoms  were  given.  Most  of  our  beliefs  about  human 
nature  in  individuals  (psychology)  and  in  masses  (soci¬ 
ology)  are  still  of  a  largely  empirical  sort.  Even  the  science 
of  geometry,  now  frequently  reckoned  a  typical  rational 
science,  began,  among  the  Egyptians,  as  an  accumulation  of 


192  HOW  WE  THINK 

recorded  observations  about  methods  of  approximate  men¬ 
suration  of  land  surfaces  and  only  gradually  assumed, 
among  the  Greeks,  scientific  form. 

It  Has  Three  Obvious  Disadvantages 

The  disadvantages  of  purely  empirical  thinking  are  ob¬ 
vious.  Attention  may  be  called  to  three  of  them:  (1)  its 
tendency  to  lead  to  false  beliefs,  (2)  its  inability  to  cope 
with  the  novel,  and  (3)  its  tendency  to  engender  mental  in¬ 
ertia  and  dogmatism. 

False  Beliefs.  First,  while  many  empirical  conclusions  are, 
roughly  speaking,  correct;  while  they  are  exact  enough  to 
be  of  great  help  in  practical  life;  while  the  presages  of  a 
weatherwise  sailor  or  hunter  may  be  more  accurate,  within 
a  certain  restricted  range,  than  those  of  a  scientist  who  re¬ 
lies  wholly  upon  scientific  observations  and  tests ;  while,  in¬ 
deed,  empirical  observations  and  records  furnish  the  raw 
or  crude  material  of  scientific  knowledge,  yet  the  empirical 
method  affords  no  way  of  discriminating  between  right  and 
wrong  conclusions.  Hence  it  is  responsible  for  a  multitude 
of  false  beliefs.  The  technical  designation  for  one  of  the 
commonest  fallacies  is  post  hoc,  ergo  propter  hoc;  the  belief 
that  because  one  thing  comes  after  another,  it  comes  be¬ 
cause  of  the  other.  Now  this  weakness  in  method  is  the  ani¬ 
mating  principle  of  empirical  conclusions,  even  when  they 
are  correct  —  the  correctness  being  almost  as  much  a  matter 
of  luck  as  of  method.  That  potatoes  should  be  planted  only 
during  the  crescent  moon,  that  near  the  sea  people  are  born 
at  high  tide  and  die  at  low  tide,  that  a  comet  is  an  omen 
of  danger,  that  bad  luck  follows  the  cracking  of  a  mirror, 
that  a  patent  medicine  cures  a  disease  —  these  and  a  thou¬ 
sand  like  notions  are  asseverated  on  the  basis  of  empirical 
coincidence  and  conjunction. 

The  more  numerous  the  experienced  instancea  and  the 


empirical  and  scientific  thought  193 

cloaer  the  watch  kept  upon  them,  the  greater  is  the  trust¬ 
worthiness  of  constant  conjunction  as  evidence  of  connec¬ 
tion  among  the  things  themselves.  Many  of  our  most  im¬ 
portant  beliefs  still  have  only  this  sort  of  warrant.  No  one 
can  yet  tell,  with  certainty,  the  necessary  cause  of  old  age 
or  of  death,  which  are  empirically  the  most  certain  of  all 
expectations. 

Confronting  the  Novel.  Second,  even  the  most  reliable 
beliefs  of  this  type  fail  when  they  confront  the  novel.  Since 
they  rest  upon  past  uniformities,  they  are  useless  when  fur¬ 
ther  experience  departs  in  any  considerable  measure  from 
ancient  incident  and  wonted  precedent.  Empirical  inference 
follows  the  grooves  and  ruts  that  custom  wears  and  has  no 
track  to  follow  when  the  groove  disappears.  So  important  is 
this  aspect  of  the  matter  that  Clifford  found  the  difference 
between  ordinary  skill  and  scientific  thought  right  here. 
“  Skill  enables  a  man  to  deal  with  the  same  circumstances 
that  he  has  met  before,  scientific  thought  enables  him  to 
deal  with  different  circumstances  that  he  has  never  met 
before.”  And  he  goes  so  far  as  to  define  scientific  thinking  as 
“  the  application  of  old  experience  to  new  circumstances.” 

Mental  Inertia  and  Dogmatism.  Third,  we  have  not  yet 
made  the  acquaintance  of  the  most  harmful  feature  of 
the  empirical  method.  Mental  inertia,  laziness,  unjustifiable 
conservatism,  are  its  probable  accompaniments.  Its  general 
effect  upon  mental  attitude  is  more  serious  than  even  the 
specific  wrong  conclusions  in  which  it  has  landed.  Wherever 
the  chief  dependence  in  forming  inferences  is  upon  the  con¬ 
junctions  observed  in  past  experience,  failures  to  agree  with 
the  usual  order  are  slurred  over,  cases  of  successful  confirma¬ 
tion  are  exaggerated.  Since  the  mind  naturally  demands 
some  principle  of  continuity,  some  connecting  link  between 
separate  facts  and  causes,  forces  are  arbitrarily  invented  for 
that  purpose.  Fantastic  and  mythological  explanations  are 


HOW  WE  THINK 


.194 

resorted  to  in  order  to  supply  missing  links.  The  pump  brings 
water  because  nature  abhoi's  a  vacuum;  opium  makes  men 
sleep  because  it  has  a  dormitive  potency;  we  recollect  a  past 
event  because  we  have  a  faculty  of  memory.  In  the  history 
of  the  progress  of  human  knowledge;  out-and-out  myths 
accompany  the  first  stage  of  empiricism,  while  hidden 
‘  essences  ’  and  occult  ‘  forces  ’  mark  its  second  stage.  By 
their  very  nature  these  '  causes  ’  escape  observation,  so  that 
their  explanatory  value  can  be  neither  confirmed  nor  refuted 
by  further  observation  or  experience.  Hence  belief  in  them 
becomes  purely  traditionary.  They  give  rise  to  doctrines 
that,  inculcated  and  handed  down,  become  dogmas;  subse¬ 
quent  inquiry  and  reflection  are  actually  stifled.^ 

Certain  men  or  classes  of  men  come  to  be  the  accepted 
guardians  and  transmitters  —  instructors  —  of  established 
doctrines.  To  question  the  beliefs  is  to  question  their  au¬ 
thority;  to  accept  the  beliefs  is  evidence  of  loyalty  to  the 
powers  that  be,  a  proof  of  good  citizenship.  Passivity, 
docility,  acquiescence,  come  to  be  primal  intellectual  vir¬ 
tues.  Pacts  and  events  presenting  novelty  and  variety  are 
slighted  or  are  sheared  down  till  they  fit  into  the  Procrustean 
bed  of  habitual  belief.  Inquiry  and  doubt  are  silenced  by 
citation  of  ancient  laws  or  a  multitude  of  miscellaneous  and 
unsifted  cases.  This  attitude  of  mind  generates  dislike  of 
change,  and  the  resulting  aversion  to  novelty  is  fatal  to 
progress.  What  will  not  fit  into  the  established  canons  is 
outlawed;  men  who  make  new  discoveries  are  objects  of 
suspicion  and  even  of  persecution.  Beliefs  that  perhaps 
originally  were  the  products  of  fairly  extensive  and  careful 
observation  are  stereotyped  into  fixed  traditions  and  semi- 
sacred  dogmas,  accepted  simply  upon  authority,  and  are 
mixed  with  fantastic  conceptions  that  happen  to  have  won 
the  acceptance  of  authorities. 

^  See  page  27, 


empirical  and  scientific  thought  195 


II.  Sgientipic  Method 
Scientific  Method  Employs  Analysis 

In  contrast  with  the  empirical  method  stands  the  scientific. 
Scientific  method  replaces  the  repeated  conjunction  or  coin¬ 
cidence  of  separate  facts  by  discovery  of  a  single  compre¬ 
hensive  fact,  effecting  this  replacement  by  breaking  up  the 
coarse  or  gross  facts  of  observation  into  a  number  of  minuter 
processes  not  directly  accessible  to  perception. 

If  a  layman  were  asked  why  water  rises  from  the  cistern 
when  an  ordinary  pump  is  worked,  he  would  doubtless  an¬ 
swer,  "  By  suction.”.  Suction  is  regarded  as  a  force  like  heat 
or  pressure.  If  such  a  person  is  confronted  by  the  fact  that 
water  rises  with  a  suction  pump  only  about  thirty-three  feet, 
he  easily  disposes  of  the  diflSculty  on  the  ground  that  all 
forces  vary  in  their  intensities  and  finally  reach  a  limit  at 
which  they  cease  to  operate.  The  variation  with  elevation 
above  the  sea  level  of  the  height  to  which  water  can  be 
pumped  is  either  unnoticed,  or,  if  noted,  is  dismissed  as  one 
of  the  curious  anomalies  in  which  nature  abounds. 

Now  the  scientist  advances  by  assuming  that  what  seems 
to  observation  to  be  a  single  total  fact  is  in  truth  complex. 
He  attempts,  therefore,  to  break  up  the  single  fact  of  water- 
rising-in-the-pipe  into  a  number  of  lesser  facts,  in  short,  into 
data.^  His  method  of  proceeding  is  by  varying  conditions 
one  by  one  so  far  as  possible,  and  noting  just  what  happens 
when  each  given  condition  is  eliminated,  In  this  way  a  fact 
too  coarse  and  too  extensive  to  be  explained  as  a  whole  is 
resolved  into  a  set  of  minor  facts.  Each  minor  fact  is  under¬ 
stood  because  it  states  a  connection  of  cause  and  effect. 

2  See  page  104. 


196 


HOW  WE  THINK 


Two  Methods  of  Varying  Conditions 

There  are  two  methods  of  varying  conditions.®  The  first 
is  an  extension  of  the  empirical  method  of  observation.  It 
consists  in  comparing  very  carefully  the  results  of  a  great 
number  of  observations  that  have  occurred  accidentally 
under  dijf event  conditions,  The  difference  in  the  rise  of  the 
water  at  different  heights  above  the  sea  level  and  its  total 
cessation  when  the  distance  to  be  lifted  is,  even  at  sea  level, 
more  than  thirty-three  feet,  are  emphasized,  instead  of 
being  slurred  over.  The  purpose  is  to  find  out  what  special 
conditions  are  present  when  the  effect  occurs  and  are  absent 
when  it  fails  to  occur.  These  special  conditions  are  then  sub¬ 
stituted  for  the  gross  fact.  Some  of  these  more  definite  and 
exact  data  will  give  the  key  to  understanding  the  event. 

The  method  of  analysis  by  comparing  cases  is,  however, 
badly  handicapped;  it  can  do  nothing  until  a  certain  num¬ 
ber  of  diversified  cases  happen  to  present  themselves.  And 
even  when  such  cases  are  at  hand,  it  will  be  questionable 
whether  they  vary  in  just  these  respects  in  which  it  is  im¬ 
portant  that  they  should  vary  in  order  to  throw  light  upon 
the  question  at  issue.  The  method  is  passive  and  dependent 
upon  external  accidents.  Hence  the  superiority  of  the  active, 
or  experimental,  method.  Even  a  small  number  of  observa¬ 
tions  may  suggest  an  explanation —  a  hypothesis,  or  theory. 
Working  upon  this  suggestion,  the  scientist  then  intention¬ 
ally  varies  conditions  and  notes  what  happens.  If  the  empiri¬ 
cal  observations  have  suggested  to  him  the  possibility  of  a 
connection  between  air  pressure  on  the  water  and  the  rising 
of  the  water  in  the  tube  where  air  pressure  is  absent,  he  de¬ 
liberately  empties  the  air  out  of  the  vessel  in  which  the  water 

®  The  next  two  paragraphs  repeat,  for  purposes  of  the  present  dis- 
ouBsion,  what  we  have  already  noted  in  a  different  context,  See 
page  176. 


empirical  and  scientific  thought  197 
is  contained  and  notes  that  ‘  suction  ’  no  longer  works,  or  he 
intentionally  increases  atmospheric  pressure  on  the  water 
and  notes  the  result.  He  institutes  experiments  to  calculate 
the  weight  of  air  at  the  sea  level  and  at  various  levels  above 
and  compares  the  results  of  reasoning  based  upon  the  pres¬ 
sure  of  air  of  these  various  weights  upon  a  certain  volume  of 
water  with  the  results  actually  obtained  by  observation. 
Observations  jormed  by  variation  of  conditions  on  the  basis 
of  some  idea  or  theory  constitute  experiment.  Experiment  is 
the  chief  resource  in  scientific  reasoning  because  it  facilitates 
tlie  picking  out  of  significant  elements  in  a  gross,  vague 
whole. 


Experiment  Involves  both  Analysis  and  Synthesis 

Experimental  thinking,  or  scientific  reasoning,  is  thus  a 
conjoint  process  of  analysis  and  synthesis,  or,  in  less  techni¬ 
cal  language,  of  discrimination  and  identification.  The  gross 
fact  of  water  rising  when  the  suction  valve  is  worked  is 
resolved  or  discriminated  into  a  number  of  independent 
variables,  some  of  which  had  never  before  been  observed  or 
even  thought  of  in  connection  with  the  fact.  One  of  these 
facts,  the  weight  of  the  atmosphere,  is  then  selectively  seized 
upon  as  the  key  to  the  entire  phenomenon.  This  disentangling 
constitutes  analysis.  But  atmosphere  and  its  pressure  or 
weight  is  a  fact  not  confined  to  this  single  instance.  It  is  a 
fact  familiar,  or  at  least  discoverable  as  operative,  in  a  great 
number  of  other  events.  In  fixing  upon  this  imperceptible 
and  minute  fact  as  the  essence  or  key  to  the  elevation  of 
water  by  the  pump,  the  pump-fact  has  thus  been  assimilated 
to  a  whole  group  of  ordinary  facts  from  which  it  was  pre¬ 
viously  isolated.  This  assimilation  constitutes  synthesis. 
Moreover,  the  fact  of  atmospheric  pressure  is  itself  a  case 
of  one  of  the  commonest  of  all  facts  —  weight,  or  gravita¬ 
tional  force.  Conclusions  that  apply  to  the  common  fact  of 


HOW  WE  THINK 


198 

weight  are  thus  transferable  to  the  consideration  and  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  relatively  rare  and  exceptional  case  of  the 
suction  of  water.  The  suction  pump  is  seen  to  be  a  case  of 
the  same  kind  or  sort  as  the  siphon,  the  barometer,  the  rising 
of  the  balloon,  and  a  multitude  of  other  things  with  which 
at  first  sight  it  has  no  connection  at  all.  This  is  another  in¬ 
stance  of  the  synthetic,  or  integrative,  fimction  of  thinking. 

If  we  revert  to  the  advantages  of  scientific  over  empirical 
thinking,  we  find  that  we  now  have  the  clue  to  them. 

Lessened  Liability  to  Error.  The  increased  security,  the 
added  factor  of  certainty  or  proof,  is  due  to  the  substitu¬ 
tion  of  the  detailed  and  specific  fact  of  atmospheric  pressure 
for  the  gross  and  total  and  relatively  miscellaneous  fact  of 
suction.  The  latter  is  complex,  and  its  complexity  is  due  to 
many  unknown  and  unspecified  factors;  hence,  any  state¬ 
ment  about  it  is  more  or  less  random  and  likely  to  be  de¬ 
feated  by  any  unforeseen  variation  of  circumstances,  Com¬ 
paratively,  at  least,  the  minute  and  detailed  fact  of  air 
pressure  is  a  measurable  and  definite  fact  —  one  that  can 
be  picked  out  and  managed  with  assurance. 

Ability  to  Manage  the  New.  As  analysis  accounts  for  the 
added  certainty,  so  synthesis  accounts  for  ability  to  cope 
with  the  novel  and  variable.  Weight  is  a  much  commoner 
fact  than  atmospheric  weight,  and  this  in  turn  is  a  much 
oomtooner  fact  than  the  workings  of  the  suction  pump.  To 
be  able  to  substitute  the  common  and  frequent  fact  for  that 
which  is  relatively  rare  and  peculiar  is  to  reduce  the  seem¬ 
ingly  novel  and  exceptional  to  cases  of  a  general  and  familiar 
principle  and  thus  to  bring  them  under  control  for  inter¬ 
pretation  and  prediction. 

As  Professor  James  says: 

Think  of  heat  as  motion  and  whatever  is  true  of  motion 
win  be  true  of  heat;  but  we  have  a  hundred  experiences  of 
motion  for  every  one  of  heat.  Think  of  rays  passing  through 


empirical  and  scientific  thought  199 

this  lens  as  cases  of  bending  toward  the  perpendicular,  and 
you  substitute  for  the  comparatively  unfamiliar  lens  the  very 
familiar  notion  of  a  particular  change  in  direction  of  a  line, 
of  which  notion  every  day  brings  ua  countless  examples.^ 

Interest  in  the  Future.  The  change  of  attitude  from  con- 
servative  reliance  upon  the  past,  upon  routine  and  custom, 
to  faith  in  progress  through  the  intelligent  regulation  of  ex¬ 
isting  conditions  is,  of  course,  the  reflex  of  the  scientific 
method  of  experimentation.  The  empirical  method  inevi¬ 
tably  magnifies  the  influences  of  the  past;  the  experimental 
method  throws  into  relief  the  possibilities  of  the  future.  The 
empirical  method  says,  “  Wait  till  there  is  a  sufficient  num¬ 
ber  of  cases;  ”  the  experimental  method  says,  "Produce  the 
cases."  The  former  depends  upon  nature’s  accidentally  hap¬ 
pening  to  present  ua  with  certain  conjunctions  of  circum¬ 
stances;  the  latter  deliberately  and  intentionally  endeavors 
to  bring  about  the  conjunction.  By  this  method  the  notion  of 
progress  secures  scientific  warrant. 

Scientific  Thinking  Is  Freed  from  Considerations  of  the 
Immediate  and  the  Forceful 

Ordinary  experience  is  controlled  largely  by  the  direct 
strength  and  intensity  of  various  occurrences.  What  is 
bright,  sudden,  loud,  secures  notice  and  is  given  a  con¬ 
spicuous  rating.  What  is  dim,  feeble,  and  continuous  gets 
ignored,  or  is  regarded  as  of  slight  importance.  Customary 
experience  tends  to  the  control  of  thinking  by  considerations 
of  direct  and  immediate  strength  rather  than  by  those  of 
importanee  in  the  long  run.  Animals  without  the  power  of 
forecast  and  planning  must,  upon  the  whole,  respond  to  the 
stimuli  that  are  most  urgent  at  the  moment  or  cease  to  exist. 
These  stimuli  lose  nothing  of  their  direct  urgency  and 

*  Psychology,  vol.  II,  p.  342. 


HOW  WE  THINK 


200 

clamorous  insistency  when  the  thinking  power  develops ;  and 
yet  thinking  demands  the  subordination  of  the  immediate 
stimulus  to  the  remote  and  distant.  The  feeble  and  the 
minute  may  be  of  much  greater  importance  than  the  glaring 
and  the  big.  The  latter  may  be  signs  of  a  force  that  is  al¬ 
ready  exhausting  itself ;  the  former  may  indicate  the  begin¬ 
nings  of  a  process  in  which  the  whole  fortune  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  is  involved.  The  prime  necessity  for  scientific  thought 
is  that  the  thinker  be  freed  from  the  tyranny  of  sense  stimuli 
and  habit,  and  this  emancipation  is  also  the  necessary  con¬ 
dition  of  progress. 

Consider  the  following  quotation: 

When  it  first  occurred  to  a  reflecting  mind  that  moving 
water  bad  a  property  identical  with  human  or  brute  force; 
namely,  the  property  of  setting  other  masses  in  motion,  over¬ 
coming  inertia  and  resistance, — when  the  sight  of  the  stream 
suggested  through  this  point  of  likeness  the  power  of  the  ani¬ 
mal,  —  a  new  addition  was  made  to  the  class  of  prime  mov¬ 
ers;  and  when  circumstances  permitted,  this  power  could 
become  a  substitute  for  the  others.  It  may  seem  to  the  modem 
understanding,  familiar  with  water  wheels  and  drifting  rafts, 
that  the  similarity  here  was  an  extremely  obvious  one.  But 
if  we  put  ourselves  back  into  an  early  state  of  mind,  when 
running  water  affected  the  mind  by  its  brilliancy ^  its  roar  and 
irregular  devastdtion,  we  may  easily  suppose  that  to  identify 
this  with  animal  muscular  energy  was  by  no  means  an  obvious 
effort.® 

The  Value  of  Abstraction 

If  we  add  to  these  obvious  sensory  features  the  various 
social  customs  and  expectations  that  fix  the  attitude  of  the 
individual,  the  evil  of  the  subjection  of  free  and  fertile  sug¬ 
gestion  to  empirical  considerations  —  that  ia,  to  the  past 

'  Bain,  The  Senses  and  Intellect,  third  American  ed.,  1879,  p,  492 
(italics  not  in  original) . 


empirical  and  scientific  thought  201 
and  to  more  or  less  uncontrolled  experience  —  becomes 
evident. 

Abstraction  is  an  indispensable  element  in  even  ordinary- 
thinking.  It  is  found  in  all  analysis,  in  all  observation  that 
detaches  a  quality  from  a  vague  blur  in  which  it  has  been 
absorbed  so  as  to  give  it  distinctness.  But  scientific  abstrac¬ 
tion  lays  hold  upon  relations  that  could  not  in  any  case 
be  perceived  by  sense.  Its  character  is  well  brought  out  in 
the  quotation  just  made  from  Bain.  Some  man  got  away 
from  the  almost  overpowering  conspicuous  traits  of  run¬ 
ning  water  to  grasp  a  relation,  that  of  carrying  power. 

A  notion  of  abstraction  is  sometimes  advanced  that  neg¬ 
lects  this  property  and  makes  it  intellectually  insignificant. 
It  is  supposed  to  be  simply  the  power  of  attending  to  some 
quality  that  an  object  is  already  known  to  possess  to  the 
exclusion  of  all  other  traits  and  features.  But  while  this  act 
is,  under  some  circumstances,  of  practical  value,  the  logical 
value  of  abstraction  consists  in  seizing  upon  some  quality 
or  relation  not  previously  grasped  at  all,  making  it  stand 
out.  It  was  an  act  of  abstraction  when  the  wing  of  a  bird 
was  seen  to  be  identical,  morphologically,  with  the  forearm 
or  foreleg,  of  other  mammals;  when  the  pod  of  peas  and 
beans  was  seen  to  be  a  modified  form  of  leaf  and  stem. 
Abstracting  gets  the  mind  emancipated  from  conspicuous 
familiar  traits  that  hold  it  fixed  by  their  very  famili¬ 
arity.  Thereby  it  acquires  ability  to  dig  underneath  the 
already  known  to  some  unfamiliar  property  or  relation  that 
is  intellectually  much  more  significant  because  it  makes 
possible  a  more  analytic  and  more  extensive  inference. 

The  Meaning  of  ‘  Experience  ’ 

The  term  experience  may  thus  be  interpreted  with  refer¬ 
ence  either  to  the  empirical  or  to  the  experimental  attitude 
of  mind.  Experience  is  not  a  rigid  and  closed  thing;  it  is 


HOW  WE  THINK 


202 

vital,  and  hence  growing.  When  dominated  by  the  past,  by 
custom  and  routine,  it  is  often  opposed  to  the  reasonable, 
the  thoughtful.  But  experience  also  includes  the  reflection 
that  sets  us  free  from  the  limiting  influence  of  sense,  appetite, 
and  tradition.  Experience  may  welcome  and  assimilate  all 
that  the  most  exact  and  penetrating  thought  discovers.  In¬ 
deed,  the  business  of  education  might  be  defined  as  an 
emancipation  and  enlargement  of  experience.  Education 
takes  the  individual  while  he  is  relatively  plastic,  before  he 
has  become  so  indurated  by  isolated  experiences  as  to  be 
rendered  hopelessly  empirical  in  his  habit  of  mind.  The 
attitude  of  childhood  is  naive,  wondering,  experimental;  the 
world  of  man  and  nature  is  new.  Bight  methods  of  education 
preserve  and  perfect  this  attitude,  and  thereby  short-circuit 
for  the  individual  the  slow  progress  of  the  race,  eliminating 
the  waste  that  comes  from  inert  routine  and  lazy  dependence 
on  the  past.  Abstract  thought  is  imagination  seeing  familiar 
objects  in  a  new  light  and  thus  opening  new  vistas  in  experi¬ 
ence,  Experiment  follows  the  road  thus  open  and  tests  its 
permanent  value. 


PART  THREE 

THE  TRAINING  OF  THOUGHT 


CHAPTER  FOURTEEN 

ACTIVITY  AND  THE  TRAINING 
OF  THOUGHT 


In  this  chapter  we  shall  gather  together  and  amplify  con- 
aiderationa  that  have  already  been  advanced,  in  various 
passages  of  the  preceding  pages,  concerning  the  relation  of 
action  to  thought.  We  shall  follow,  though  not  with  exact¬ 
ness,  the  order  of  development  in  the  unfolding  of  a  human 
being. 


I.  The  Early  Stage  of  Activity 
“  What  Is  the  Baby  Thinking  About?  ” 

The  sight  of  a  baby  often  calls  out  the  question:  “What 
do  you  suppose  he  is  thinking  about?  ”  By  the  nature  of  the 
case,  the  question  is  unanswerable  in  detail ;  but,  also  by  the 
nature  of  the  case,  we  may  be  sure  about  a  baby's  chief  in¬ 
terest.  His  primary  problem  is  mastery  of  his  body  as  a 
tool  of  securing  comfortable  and  effective  adjustments  to  his 
surroundings,  physical  and  social.  The  child  has  to  learn  to 
do  almost  everything:  to  see,  to  hear,  to  reach,  to  handle,  to 
balance  the  body,  to  creep,  to  walk,  and  so  on.  Even  if  it 
be  true  that  human  beings  have  even  more  instinctive  reac¬ 
tions  than  lower  animals,  it  is  also  true  that  instinctive  tend¬ 
encies  are  much  less  perfect  in  men,  and  that  most  of  them 
are  of  little  use  till  they  are  intelligently  combined  and  di¬ 
rected.  A  little  chick  just  out  of  the  shell  will  after  a  few 
trials  peck  at  and  grasp  grains  of  food  with  its  beak  as  well 
as  at  any  later  time.  This  involves  a  complicated  codrdina- 


HOW  WE  THINK 


206 

tion  of  the  eye  and  the  head.  An  infant  does  not  even  begin  to 
reach  definitely  for  things  that  the  eye  sees  till  he  is  several 
months  old,  and  even  then  several  weeks’  practice  is  required 
before  he  learns  the  adjustment  so  as  neither  to  overreach  nor 
to  undeireach.  It  may  not  be  literally  true  that  the  child  will 
grasp  for  the  moon,  but  it  is  true  that  he  needs  much  practice 
before  he  can  tell  whether  an  object  is  within  reach  or  not. 
The  arm  is  thrust  out  instinctively  in  response  to  a  stimulus 
from  the  eye,  and  this  tendency  is  the  origin  of  the  ability 
to  reach  and  grasp  exactly  and  quickly;  but  nevertheless 
final  mastery  requires  observing  and  selecting  the  success¬ 
ful  movements  and  arranging  them  in  view  of  an  end,  Thm 
operations  of  conscious  selection  and  arrangement  constitute 
Uhinhing,  though  of  a  rudimentary  type. 

Mastery  of  the  Body  Is  an  Intellectual  Problem 

Since  mastery  of  the  bodily  organs  is  necessary  for  all 
later  developments,  such  problems  are  both  interesting  and 
important,  and  solving  them  supplies  a  very  genuine  train¬ 
ing  of  thinking  power.  The  joy  the  child  shows  in  learning 
to  use  his  limbs,  to  translate  what  he  sees  into  what  he 
handles,  to  connect  sounds  with  sights,  sights  with  taste  and 
touch,  and  the  rapidity  with  which  intelligence  grows  in  the 
first  year  and  a  half  of  life  (the  time  during  which  the  more 
fundamental  problems  of  the  use  of  the  organism  are  mas¬ 
tered)  are  sufficient  evidence  that  the  development  of  physi¬ 
cal  control  is  not  a  physical,  but  an  intellectual,  achieve¬ 
ment. 


Social  Adjustments  Soon  Become  Important 

Although  in  the  early  months  the  child  is  mainly  occu¬ 
pied  in  learning  to  use  his  body  to  accommodate  himself  to 
physical  conditions  in  a  comfortable  way  and  to  use  things 
skillfully  and  effectively,  yet  social  adjustments  are  very 


ACTIVITY  AND  TRAINING  THOUGHT  207 

important.  In  connection  with  parents,  nurse,  brother,  and 
sister,  the  child  learns  the  signs  of  satisfaction  of  hunger, 
of  removal  of  discomfort,  of  the  approach  of  agreeable 
light,  color,  sound,  and  so  on.  His  contact  with  physical 
things  is  regulated  by  persons,  and  he  soon  distinguishes 
persons  as  the  most  important  and  interesting  of  all  the 
objects  with  which  he  has  to  do. 

Speech,  the  accurate  adaptation  of  sounds  heard  to  the 
movements  of  tongue  and  lips,  is,  however,  the  great  in¬ 
strument  of  social  adaptation;  and  with  the  development 
of  speech  (usually  in  the  second  year)  adaptation  of  the 
baby’s  activities  to  and  with  those  of  other  persons  gives 
the  keynote  of  mental  life.  His  range  of  possible  activi¬ 
ties  is  indefinitely  widened  as  he  watches  what  other 
persons  do,  and  as  he  tries  to  understand  and  to  do  what 
they  encourage  him  to  attempt.  The  outline  pattern  of  men¬ 
tal  life  is  thus  set  in  the  first  four  or  five  years.  Years,  cen¬ 
turies,  generations  of  invention  and  planning,  may  have 
gone  to  the  development  of  the  performances  and  occupa¬ 
tions  of  the  adults  surrounding  the  child.  Yet  for  him  their 
activities  are  direct  stimuli;  they  are  part  of  his  natural 
environment;  they  are  carried  on  in  physical  terms  that  ap¬ 
peal  to  his  eye,  ear,  and  touch.  He  cannot,  of  course,  appro¬ 
priate  their  meaning  directly  through  his  senses;  but  they 
furnish  stimuli  to  which  he  responds,  so  that  his  attention  is 
focussed  upon  a  higher  order  of  materials  and  of  problems. 
Were  it  not  for  this  process  by  which  the  achievements  of 
one  generation  form  the  stimuli  that  direct  the  activities  of 
the  next,  the  story  of  civilization  would  be  writ  in  water, 
and  each  generation  would  have  laboriously  to  make  for 
itself,  if  it  could,  its  way  out  of  savagery.  In  learning  to 
understand  and  make  words,  children  learn  a  great  deal 
more  than  the  words  themselves.  They  gain  a  habit  that 
opens  a  new  world  to  them. 


208 


HOW  WE  THINK 


The  Role  of  Imitation 

Imitation  ia  one,  though  only  one,^  of  the  meana  hy  which 
the  activities  of  adults  supply  stimuli  that  are  so  interesting, 
so  varied,  so  complex,  and  so  novel  as  to  occasion  a  rapid 
progress  of  thought.  Mere  imitation,  however,  would  not 
give  rise  to  thinking;  if  we  could  learn  like  parrots  by  sim- 
ply  copying  the  outward  acts  of  others,  we  should  never 
have  to  think ;  nor  should  we  know,  after  we  had  mastered 
the  copied  act,  what  was  the  meaning  of  the  thing  we  had 
done.  Educators  (and  psychologists)  have  often  assumed 
that  acts  that  reproduce  the  behavior  of  others  are  acquired 
merely  by  imitation.  But  a  child  rarely  learns  by  conscious 
imitation,  and  to  say  that  his  imitation  is  unconscious  is  to 
say  that  it  ia  not,  from  his  standpoint,  imitation  at  all.  The 
word,  the  gesture,  the  act,  the  occupation  of  another,  falls 
in  line  with  some  impulse  already  active  and  suggests  some 
satisfactory  mode  of  expression,  some  end  in  which  it  may 
find  fulfillment.  Having  this  end  of  his  own,  the  child  then 
notes  other  persons,  as  he  notes  natural  events,  to  get  fur¬ 
ther  suggestions  as  to  means  of  its  realization.  He  selects 
some  of  the  means  he  observes,  tries  them  on,  finds  them 
successful  or  unsuccessful,  is  confirmed  or  weakened  in  his 
belief  in  their  value,  and  so  continues  selecting,  arranging, 
adapting,  testing,  till  he  can  accomplish  what  he  wishes.  The 
onlooker  may  then  observe  the  resemblance  of  this  act  to 
some  act  of  an  adult  and  conclude  that  it  was  acquired  by 
imitation,  while  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  was  acquired  by  at¬ 
tention,  observation,  selection,  experimentation,  and  con¬ 
firmation  by  results.  Only  because  this  method  is  employed 
is  there  intellectual  discipline  and  an  educative  result.  The 
presence  of  adult  activities  plays  an  enormous  role  in  the  in¬ 
tellectual  growth  of  the  child  because  they  add  to  the  natu- 
^  See  page  58. 


activity  and  training  thought  209 

ral  stimuli  of  the  world  new  stimuli  that  are  more  exactly 
adapted  to  the  needs  of  a  human  being,  that  are  richer, 
better  organized,  more  complex  in  range,  permitting  more 
flexible  adaptations,  and  calling  out  novel  reactions.  But  in 
utilizing  these  stimuli,  the  child  follows  the  same  methods 
that  he  uses  when  he  is  forced  to  think  in  order  to  master 
his  body. 


II.  Play,  Work,  and  Allied  Forms  op  Activity 
The  Significance  of  Play  and  of  Playfulness 

When  things  become  signs,  when  they  gain  a  representa¬ 
tive  capacity  as  standing  for  other  things,  play  is  trans¬ 
formed  from  mere  physical  exuberance  into  an  activity  in¬ 
volving  a  mental  factor.  A  little  girl  who  had  broken  her  doll 
was  seen  to  perform  with  the  leg  of  the  doll  all  the  opera¬ 
tions  of  washing,  putting  to  bed,  and  fondling,  that  she  had 
been  accustomed  to  perform  with  the  entire  doll.  The  part 
stood  for  the  whole;  she  reacted,  not  to  the  stimulus  sensibly 
present,  but  to  the  meaning  suggested  by  the  sense  object. 
So  children  use  a  stone  for  a  table,  leaves  for  plates,  acorns 
for  cups.  So  they  use  their  dolls,  their  trains,  their  blocks, 
their  other  toys.  In  manipulating  them,  they  are  living  not 
with  the  physical  things,  but  in  the  large  world  of  meanings, 
natural  and  social,  evoked  by  these  things.  So  when  chil¬ 
dren  play  horse,  play  store,  play  house  or  making  calls,  they 
are  subordinating  the  physically  present  to  the  ideally  sig¬ 
nified.  In  this  way,  a  world  of  meanings,  a  store  of  concepts 
(so  fundamental  in  all  intellectual  achievement) ,  is  defined 
and  built  up. 

Moreover,  not  only  do  meanings  thus  become  familiar  ac¬ 
quaintances,  but  they  are  organized,  arranged  in  groups, 
made  to  cohere  in  connected  ways.  A  play  and  a  story  blend 


HOW  WE  THINK 


210 

insensibly  into  each  other.  The  most  fanciful  plays  of  chil¬ 
dren  rarely  lose  all  touch  with  the  mutual  fitness  and  perti¬ 
nency  of  various  meanings  to  one  another ;  the  ‘  freest  ’  plays 
observe  some  principles  of  coherence  and  unification.  They 
have  a  beginning,  middle,  and  end.  In  games,  rules  of  order 
run  through  various  minor  acts  and  bind  them  into  a  con¬ 
nected  whole.  The  rhythm,  the  competition,  and  the  coopera¬ 
tion  involved  in  most  plays  and  games  also  introduce  organi¬ 
zation.  There  is,  then,  nothing  mysterious  or  mystical  in  the 
discovery  made  by  Plato  and  remade  by  Froebel  that  play 
is  the  chief,  almost  the  only,  mode  of  education  for  the  child 
in  the  years  of  later  infancy. 

Playfulness  is  a  more  important  consideration  than  play. 
The  former  is  an  attitude  of  mind;  the  latter  is  a  passing 
outward  manifestation  of  this  attitude.  When  things  are 
treated  simply  as  vehicles  of  suggestion,  what  is  suggested 
overrides  the  thing.  Hence  the  playful  attitude  is  one  of 
freedom.  The  person  is  not  bound  to  the  physical  traits  of 
things,  nor  does  he  care  whether  a  thing  really  ‘  means  ’ 
what  he  takes  it  to  represent.  When  the  child  plays  horse 
with  a  broom  and  cars  with  chairs,  the  fact  that  the  broom 
does  not  really  represent  a  horse  or  a  chair  a  locomotive  is 
of  no  account.  In  order,  then,  that  playfulness  may  not  ter¬ 
minate  in  arbitrary  fancifulness  and  in  building  up  an  im¬ 
aginary  world  alongside  the  world  of  actual  things,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  play  attitude  should  gradually  pass  into 
a  work  attitude. 


The  Significance  of  Work 

What  is  work  —  work  not  as  mere  external  performance, 
but  as  attitude  of  mind?  In  the  natural  course  of  growth, 
children  come  to  find  irresponsible,  make-believe  plays  in¬ 
adequate.  A  fiction  is  too  easy  a  way  out  to  afford  content¬ 
ment,  not  stimulus  enough  to  call  forth  satisfactory  mental 


activity  and  training  thought  211 

response.  When  this  point  is  reached,  the  ideas  that  things 
suggest  are  applied  to  the  things  with  some  regard  to  fit¬ 
ness.  A  small  cart,  resembling  a  ‘  real  ’  cart,  with  ‘  real  ’ 
wheels,  tongue,  and  body,  meets  the  mental  demand  better 
than  merely  making  believe  that  anything  that  comes  to 
hand  is  a  cart.  Occasionally  to  take  part  in  setting  a  ‘  real  ’ 
table  with  ‘  real  ’  dishes  brings  more  reward  than  forever  to 
make  believe  a  flat  stone  is  a  table  and  that  leaves  are  dishes. 
The  interest  may  still  center  in  the  meanings;  things  may 
be  of  importance  only  as  furthering  a  certain  meaning.  So 
far  the  attitude  is  one  of  play.  But  meaning  becomes  of  such 
a  character  that  it  must  find  embodiment,  or  at  least  ex¬ 
pression,  in  actual  things. 

The  dictionary  does  not  permit  us  to  call  such  activities 
work.  Nevertheless,  they  represent  a  passage  of  play  into 
work.  For  work  (as  a  mental  attitude,  not  as  mere  external 
performance)  means  interest  in  the  adequate  embodiment  oj 
a  meaning  (a  suggestion,  purpose,  aim)  in  objective  form 
through  the  use  of  appropriate  materials  and  appliances. 
Such  an  attitude  takes  advantage  of  the  meanings  aroused 
and  built  up  in  free  play,  but  controls  their  development  by 
seeing  to  it  that  they  are  applied  to  things  in  ways  consistent 
with  the  observable  structure  of  things  themselves. 

The  word  '  work  ’  is  not  very  satisfactory.  For  it  is  often 
used  to  denote  routine  activity  that  accomplishes  useful  re¬ 
sults  with  but  a  minimum  of  thoughtful  selection  of  means, 
deliberate  adjustment  to  produce  desired  consequences.  We 
view  work  from  the  outside  when  we  think  of  it  as  simply 
doing  things  that  need  to  be  done.  But  it  may  also  be 
looked  at  from  the  inside ;  it  must  be  so  looked  at  when  we 
are  thinking  of  it  in  relation  to  education.  Then  work  signi¬ 
fies  activity  directed  by  ends  that  thought  sets  before  the 
person  as  something  to  be  accomplished;  it  signifies  in¬ 
genuity  and  inventiveness  in  selecting  proper  means  and 


212  HOW  WE  THINK 

making  plans,  and  thus,  finally,  signifies  that  expectations 
and  ideas  are  tested  by  actual  results. 

A  child,  like  an  adult,  may  make  or  do  something  follow¬ 
ing  the  dictation  of  others,  working  mechanically  from  oral 
or  printed  instructions,  or  stereotyped  blueprints.  There  is 
then  next  to  no  thought;  his  activity  is  not  truly  reflective, 
But  as  we  have  already  noted,  the  means-consequence  rela¬ 
tion  is  the  heart  of  all  meaning.  ‘  Work,’  in  the  sense  of  in¬ 
telligent  action,  is  therefore  highly  educative,  because  it 
continually  builds  up  meanings  while  at  the  same  time  it 
tests  them  by  application  to  actual  conditions.  It  is  neces¬ 
sary,  however,  that  the  adult  do  not  judge  the  value  of  such 
an  activity  on  the  part  of  the  young  by  his  familiar  adult 
standards  about  the  value  of  the  product;  if  he  does,  the 
activity  will  usually  .seem  to  him  to  amount  to  little.  He 
must  judge  from  the  standpoint  of  the  planning,  invention, 
ingenuity,  observation,  exercised  by  the  young,  remember¬ 
ing  always  that  what  is  an  old  story  to  him  may  arouse 
emotion  and  thought  in  the  child. 

The  True  Distinction  between  Play  and  Work 

The  point  of  the  distinction  between  play  and  work  may 
be  cleared  up  by  comparing  it  with  a  more  usual  way  of 
stating  the  difference.  In  play  activity,  it  is  said,  the  inter¬ 
est  is  in  the  activity  for  its  own  sake ;  in  work,  it  is  in  the 
product  or  result  in  which  the  activity  terminates.  Hence 
the  former  is  purely  free,  while  the  latter  is  tied  down  by 
the  end  to  be  achieved.  When  the  difference  is  stated  in  this 
sharp  fashion,  there  is  almost  always  introduced  a  false,  un¬ 
natural  separation  between  process  and  product,  between 
activity  and  its  achieved  outcome.  The  true  distinction  is 
not  between  an  interest  in  activity  for  its  own  sake  and  in¬ 
terest  in  the  external  result  of  that  activity,  but  between 
an  interest  in  an  activity  just  as  it  flows  on  from  moment  to 


activity  and  training  thought  213 

moment,  and  an  interest  in  an  activity  as  tending  to  a  cul¬ 
mination,  to  an  outcome,  and  therefore  possessing  a  thread 
of  continuity  binding  together  its  successive  stages.  Both 
may  equally  exemplify  interest  in  an  activity  "  for  its  own 
sake  ” ;  but  in  the  one  case  the  activity  in  which  the  interest 
resides  is  more  or  less  casual,  following  the  accident  of  cir¬ 
cumstance  and  whim,  or  of  dictation ;  in  the  other,  the  ac¬ 
tivity  is  enriched  by  the  sense  that  it  leads  somewhere,  that 
it  amounts  to  something. 

Were  it  not  that  the  false  theory  of  the  relation  of  the 
play  and  the  work  attitudes  has  been  connected  with  un¬ 
fortunate  modes  of  school  practice,  insistence  upon  a  truer 
view  might  seem  an  unnecessary  refinement.  But  the  sharp 
break  that  so  often  prevails  between  the  kindergarten 
and  the  grades  is  evidence  that  the  theoretical  distinction 
has  practical  implications.  Under  the  title  of  '  play  ’  the 
former  is  rendered  unduly  symbolic,  fanciful,  sentimental, 
and  arbitrary;  while  under  the  antithetical  caption  of 
‘  work '  the  latter  contains  many  tasks  externally  assigned. 
The  former  has  no  end;  the  latter  an  end  so  remote  that  only 
the  educator,  not  the  child,  is  aware  that  it  is  an  end. 

There  comes  a  time  when  children  must  extend  and  make 
more  exact  their  acquaintance  with  existing  things,  must 
conceive  ends  and  consequences  with  sufficient  definiteness 
to  guide  their  actions  by  them,  and  must  acquire  some  tech¬ 
nical  skill  in  selecting  and  arranging  means  to  realize  these 
ends.  Unless  these  factors  are  gradually  introduced  in  the 
earlier  play  period,  they  must  later  be  introduced  abruptly 
and  arbitrarily,  to  the  manifest  disadvantage  of  both  the 
earlier  and  the  later  stages. 

Correlative  False  Notions  of  Imagination  and  Utility 

The  sharp  opposition  of  play  and  work  is  usually  asso¬ 
ciated  with  false  notions  of  utility  and  imagination.  Ac- 


HOW  WE  THINK 


214 

tivity  that  ia  directed  upon  matters  of  home  and  neighbor¬ 
hood  interest  ia  depreciated  as  merely  utilitarian.  To  let  the 
child  wash  dishes,  set  the  table,  engage  in  cooking,  cut  and 
sew  dolls’  clothes,  make  boxes  that  will  hold  '  real  things,’ 
and  construct  his  own  playthings  by  using  hammer  and 
nails,  excludes  (so  it  is  said)  the  sesthetic  and  appreciative 
factor,  eliminates  imagination,  and  subjects  the  child’s  de¬ 
velopment  to  material  and  practical  concerns;  while  (so  it 
is  said)  to  reproduce  symbolically  the  domestic  relationships 
of  birds  and  other  animals,  of  human  father  and  mother 
and  child,  of  workman  and  tradesman,  of  knight,  soldier, 
and  magistrate,  secures  a  liberal  exercise  of  mind  that  is  of 
great  moral  as  well  as  intellectual  value,  It  has  even  been 
stated  that  it  is  over-physical  and  utilitarian  if  a  child 
plants  seeds  and  takes  care  of  growing  plants  in  the  kinder¬ 
garten;  whereas  if  he  reproduces  dramatically  the  opera¬ 
tions  of  planting,  cultivating,  reaping,  and  so  on,  with  no 
physical  materials  or  with  symbolic  representatives,  he  edu¬ 
cates  imagination  and  his  spiritual  appreciation.  Toy  dolls, 
trains  of  cars,  boats,  and  engines  are  rigidly  excluded,  but 
cubes,  balls,  and  other  symbols  for  representing  his  social 
activities  are  recommended.  The  more  unfitted  the  physical 
object  for  its  imagined  purpose,  such  as  a  cube  for  a  boat, 
the  greater  is  the  supposed  appeal  to  the  imagination. 

There  are  several  fallacies  in  this  way  of  thinking. 

First,  the  healthy  imagination  deals  not  with  the  unreal, 
but  with  the  mental  realization  of  what  is  suggested.  Its 
exercise  is  not  a  flight  into  the  purely  fanciful  and  ideal, 
but  a  method  of  expanding  and  filling  in  what  is  real.  To 
the  child  the  homely  activities  going  on  about  him  are  not 
utilitarian  devices  for  accomplishing  physical  ends;  they 
exemplify  a  wonderful  world,  the  depths  of  which  he  has 
not  sounded,  a  world  full  of  the  mystery  and  promise  that 
attend  all  the  doings  of  the  grown-ups  whom  he  admires. 


activity  and  training  thought  215 

However  prosaic  this  world  may  be  to  the  adults  who  find 
its  duties  routine  affairs,  to  the  child  it  is  fraught  with  social 
meaning.  To  engage  in  it  is  to  exercise  the  imagination  in 
constructing  an  experience  of  wider  value  than  any  the 
child  has  yet  mastered. 

Second,  educators  sometimes  think  children  are  reacting 
to  a  great  moral  or  spiritual  truth  when  the  children’s  reac¬ 
tions  are  largely  physical  and  sensational.  Children  have 
great  powers  of  dramatic  simulation,  and  their  physical  bear¬ 
ing  may  seem  (to  adults  prepossessed  with  a  philosophic 
theory)  to  indicate  they  have  been  impressed  with  some 
lesson  of  chivalry,  devotion,  or  nobility  when  the  children, 
themselves,  are  occupied  only  with  transitory  physical  ex¬ 
citations.  To  symbolize  great  truths  far  beyond  the  child's 
range  of  actual  experience  is  an  impossibility,  and  to  at¬ 
tempt  it  is  to  invite  love  of  momentary  stimulation. 

Third,  just  as  the  opponents  of  play  in  education  always 
conceive  of  play  as  mere  amusement,  so  the  opponents  of 
direct  and  useful  activities  confuse  occupation  with  labor. 
The  adult  is  acquainted  with  responsible  labor  upon  which 
serious  financial  results  depend.  Consequently  he  seeks  re¬ 
lief,  relaxation,  amusement.  Unless  children  have  prema¬ 
turely  worked  for  hire,  unless  they  have  come  under  the 
blight  of  child  labor,  no  such  division  exists  for  them.  What¬ 
ever  appeals  to  them  at  all  appeals  directly  on  its  own  ac¬ 
count.  There  is  no  contrast  between  doing  things  for  utility 
and  for  fun.  Their  life  is  more  united  and  more  wholesome. 
To  suppose  that  activities  customarily  performed  by  adults 
only  under  the  pressure  of  utility  may  not  be  done  per¬ 
fectly  freely  and  joyously  by  children  indicates  a  lack  of 
imagination.  Not  the  thing  done,  but  the  quality  of  mind 
that  goes  into  the  doing,  settles  what  is  utilitarian  and  what 
is  unconstrained  and  creative. 


216 


HOW  WE  THINK 


III.  CoNSTnticTivE  Occupations 
The  Sciences  Grew  out  of  Occupations 

The  history  of  culture  shows  that  mankind’s  scientific 
knowledge  and  technical  abilities  have  developed,  especially 
in  all  their  earlier  stages,  out  of  the  fundamental  problems 
of  life.  Anatomy  and  physiology  grew  out  of  the  practical 
needs  of  keeping  healthy  and  active;  geometry  and  mechan¬ 
ics  out  of  demands  for  measuring  land,  for  building,  and  for 
making  labor-saving  machines;  astronomy  has  been  closely 
connected  with  navigation,  keeping  record  of  the  passage  of 
time;  botany  grew  out  of  the  requirements  of  medicine  and 
of  agronomy;  chemistry  has  been  associated  with  dyeing, 
metallurgy,  and  other  industrial  pursuits.  In  turn,  modern 
industry  is  almost  wholly  a  matter  of  applied  science;  year 
by  year  the  domain  of  routine  and  crude  empiricism  is  nar¬ 
rowed  by  the  translation  of  scientific  discovery  into  indus¬ 
trial  invention.  The  trolley,  the  telephone,  the  electric  light, 
the  steam  engine,  with  all  their  revolutionary  consequences 
for  social  intercourse  and  control,  are  the  fruits  of  science, 

School  Occupations  Offer  Intellectual  Possibilities 

These  facta  are  full  of  educational  significance.  Most  chil¬ 
dren  are  preeminently  active  in  their  tendencies.  The  schools 
have  also  taken  on — largely  from  utilitarian,  rather  than 
from  strictly  educative,  reasons  —  a  large  number  of  active 
pursuits  commonly  grouped  under  the  head  of  manual  train¬ 
ing,  including  also  school  gardens,  excursions,  and  various 
graphic  arts.  Perhaps  the  most  pressing  problem  of  educa¬ 
tion  at  the  present  moment  is  to  organize  and  relate  these 
subjects  so  that  they  will  become  instruments  for  forming 
alert,  persistent,  and  fruitful  intellectual  habits.  That  they 


activity  and  training  thought  217 

take  hold  of  the  more  primary  and  native  equipment  of 
children  (appealing  to  their  desire  to  do)  is  generally  recog¬ 
nized;  that  they  afford  great  opportunity  for  training  in 
self-reliant  and  efficient  social  service  is  gaining  acknowledg¬ 
ment.  But  they  may  also  be  used  for  presenting  typical  prob¬ 
lems  to  be  solved  by  personal  rejection  and  experimenta¬ 
tion  and  by  acquiring  definite  bodies  of  knowledge  leading 
later  to  more  specialized  scientific  knowledge.  There  is  in¬ 
deed  no  magic  by  which  mere  physical  activity  or  deft  ma¬ 
nipulation  will  secure  intellectual  results. “  Manual  subjects 
may  be  taught  by  routine,  by  dictation,  or  by  convention 
as  readily  as  bookish  subjects.  But  intelligent  consecutive 
work  in  gardening,  cooking,  or  weaving,  or  in  elementary 
wood  and  iron,  may  be  so  planned  that  it  will  inevitably  re¬ 
sult  not  only  in  students'  amassing  information  of  practical 
and  scientific  importance  in  botany,  zoology,  chemistry, 
physics,  and  other  sciences,  but  also  (what  is  more  signifi¬ 
cant)  in  their  becoming  versed  in  methods  of  experimental 
inquiry  and  proof. 

That  the  elementary  curriculum  is  overloaded  is  a  com¬ 
mon  complaint.  The  only  alternative  to  a  reactionary  return 
to  the  educational  traditions  of  the  past  lies  in  working 
out  the  intellectual  possibilities  resident  in  various  arts, 
crafts,  and  occupations,  and  reorganizing  the  curriculum  ac¬ 
cordingly.  Here,  more  than  elsewhere,  are  found  the  means 
by  which  the  blind  and  routine  experience  of  the  race  may 
be  transformed  into  illuminated  and  emancipated  experi¬ 
ment. 

Conditions  to  Be  Met  to  Render  ‘  Projects  ’  Educative 

Constructive  occupations  have  in  recent  years  found  their 
way  increasingly  into  the  schoolroom.  They  are  usu¬ 
ally  known  as  '  projects.'  In  order  that  they  may  be  truly 
2  See  page  52. 


HOW  WE  THINK 


218 

educative,  there  are  certain  conditions  that  should  be 
fulfilled. 

The  first  condition,  that  of  interest,  is  usually  met.  Un¬ 
less  the  activity  lays  hold  on  the  emotions  and  desires, 
unless  it  ofiers  an  outlet  for  energy  that  means  something 
to  the  individual  himself,  his  mind  will  turn  in  aversion 
from  it,  even  though  externally  he  keeps  at  it.  But  interest 
is  not  enough.  Given  interest,  the  important  matter  is  what 
kind  of  object  and  action  enlists  it.  Is  it  something  transi¬ 
tory  or  is  it  enduring?  Is  the  interest  mainly  one  of  excite¬ 
ment  or  is  thought  involved? 

Hence  the  second  condition  to  be  met  is  that  the  activity 
he  worth  while  intrinsically.  This  statement  does  not  signify, 
as  we  have  just  seen  in  another  connection,  that  its  outcome 
be  something  externally  useful  from  the  adult  point  of  view. 
But  it  does  mean  that  merely  trivial  activities,  those  that 
are  of  no  consequence  beyond  the  immediate  pleasure  that 
engaging  in  them  affords,  should  be  excluded.  It  is  not 
difficult  to  find  projects  that  are  enjoyable  while  at  the  same 
time  they  stand  for  something  valuable  in  life  itself. 

The  third  condition  (really  only  an  amplification  of  the 
point  just  made)  is  that  the  project  in  the  course  of  its  de¬ 
velopment  present  problems  that  awaken  new  curiosity  and 
create  a  demand  for  information.  There  is  nothing  educative 
in  an  activity,  however  agreeable  it  may  be,  that  does  not 
lead  the  mind  out  into  new  fields.  The  new  field  cannot  be 
entered  unless  the  mind  is  led  to  ask  questions  that  it  had 
not  thought  of  before  and  unless  the  presence  of  these  ques¬ 
tions  creates  a  thirst  for  additional  information  to  be  ob¬ 
tained  by  observation,  by  reading,  by  consulting  persons 
expert  in  that  particular  field. 

ffinally,  as  a  fourth  condition,  the  project  must  involve  a 
considerable  time  span  for  its  adequate  execution.  The  plan 
and  the  object  to  be  gained  must  be  capable  of  development. 


ACTIVITY  AND  TRAINING  THOUGHT  219 

one  thing  leading  on  naturally  to  another.  Unless  it  does  so, 
new  fields  cannot  be  entered.  It  is  the  province  of  the  adult 
to  look  ahead  and  see  whether  one  stage  of  achievement 
will  suggest  something  else  to  be  looked  into  and  done.  An 
occupation  has  continuity.  It  is  not  a  succession  of  unre¬ 
lated  acts,  but  is  a  consecutively  ordered  activity  in  which 
one  step  prepares  the  need  for  the  next  one  and  that  one 
adds  to,  and  carries  further  in  a  cumulative  way,  what  has 
already  been  done. 


OHAPTEE  FIFTEEN 


FROM  THE  CONCRETE  TO  THE 
ABSTRACT 


I.  What  Is  the  Concrete? 

The  maxim  enjoined  upon  teachers,  “  proceed  from  the 
concrete  to  the  abstract,”  is  familiar  rather  than  wholly 
intelligible.  Few  who  read  and  hear  it  gain  a  clear  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  starting  point,  the  concrete;  of  the  nature  of  the 
goal,  the  abstract;  and  of  the  exact  nature  of  the  path  to  be 
traversed  in  going  from  one  to  the  other.  At  times  the  in¬ 
junction  is  positively  misunderstood,  being  taken  to  mean 
that  education  should  advance  from  things  to  thought  —  as 
if  any  dealing  with  things  in  which  thinking  is  not  involved 
could  possibly  be  educative.  So  understood,  the  maxim  en¬ 
courages  mechanical  routine  or  sensuous  excitation  at  one 
end  of  the  educational  scale  —  the  lower  —  and  academic 
and  unapplied  learning  at  the  upper  end. 

Actually,  all  dealing  with  things,  even  the  child’s,  is  im¬ 
mersed  in  inference;  things  are  clothed  with  the  suggestions 
they  arouse.  They  are  significant  as  challenges  to  inter¬ 
pretation  or  as  evidences  to  substantiate  a  belief.  Nothing 
could  be  more  unnatural  than  instruction  in  things  without 
thought,  in  sense-perceptions  without  judgments  connected 
with  them.  And  if  the  abstract  to  which  we  are  to  proceed 
denotes  thought  apart  from  things,  the  goal  is  formal  and 
empty,  for  effective  thought  always  refers,  more  or  less  di¬ 
rectly,  to  things. 


PROM  CONCRETE  TO  ABSTRACT  221 


Relation  to  Direct  and  Indirect  Meaning 

Yet  the  maxim  has  a  meaning  which,  understood  and  sup¬ 
plemented,  states  the  direction  of  logical  development.  What 
is  this  meaning?  ‘  Concrete  ’  denotes  a  meaning  definitely 
marked  off  from  other  meanings  so  that  it  is  readily  appre¬ 
hended  by  itself.  When  we  hear  the  words,  table,  chair, 
stove,  coat,  we  do  not  have  to  reflect  in  order  to  grasp  what 
is  meant.^  The  terms  convey  meaning  so  directly  that  no 
effort  at  translation  is  needed.  The  meaning  of  some  terms 
and  things,  however,  is  grasped  only  by  first  calling  to  mind 
more  familiar  things  and  then  tracing  out  connections  be¬ 
tween  them  and  what  we  do  not  understand,  Roughly  speak¬ 
ing,  the  former  kind  of  meaning  is  concrete;  the  latter  is 
abstract. 

Dependence  on  the  Intellectual  Status  of  the  Individual 

To  one  who  is  thoroughly  at  home  in  physics  and  chem¬ 
istry,  the  notions  of  atom  and  molecule  are  fairly  concrete. 
They  are  constantly  used  without  involving  any  labor  of 
thought  in  apprehending  what  they  mean.  But  the  layman 
and  the  beginner  in  science  have  to  remind  themselves  of 
things  with  which  they  already  are  well  acquainted,  and  then 
go  through  a  process  of  slow  translation.  Moreover  the  terms 
atom  and  molecule  lose  their  hard-won  meaning  only  too 
easily  if  familiar  things  and  the  line  of  transition  from  them 
to  the  strange  drop  out  of  mind.  The  same  difference  is  illus¬ 
trated  by  any  technical  terms:  coefficient  and  exponent  in 
algebra,  triangle  and  square  in  their  geometric  as  distinct 
from  their  popular  meanings;  capital  and  value  in  political 
economy,  and  so  on. 

The  difference  as  noted  is  purely  relative  to  the  intellec¬ 
tual  progress  of  an  individual;  what  is  abstract  at  one  pe- 
^  See  page  150. 


HOW  WE  THINK 


222 

riod  of  growth  ia  concrete  at  another ;  or  even  the  contrary 
as  one  finds  that  things  supposed  to  be  thoroughly  familiar 
involve  strange  factors  and  unsolved  problems.  There  is 
nevertheless,  a  general  line  of  cleavage  that  decides  upon 
the  whole  what  things  fall  within,  and  what  fall  without, 
the  limits  of  familiar  acquaintance.  This  line  accordingly 
marks  off  the  concrete  and  the  abstract  in  a  fairly  perma¬ 
nent  way.  The  limits  are  fixed  mainly  by  the  demands  of 
•practical  life.  Things  such  as  sticks  and  stones,  meat  and 
potatoes,  houses  and  trees,  are  constant  features  of  the  en¬ 
vironment  of  which  we  have  to  take  account  in  order  to  live, 
Hence  their  important  meanings  are  soon  learned  and  are 
indissolubly  associated  with  objects.  We  are  acquainted  with 
a  thing  (or  it  is  familiar  to  us)  when  we  have  so  much  to 
do  with  it  that  its  strange  and  troublesome  corners  are 
rubbed  off.  The  necessities  of  social  intercourse  convey  to 
adults  a  like  concreteness  upon  such  terms  as  taxeSi  elec¬ 
tions,  wages,  the  law,  and  so  on.  Things  the  meaning  of 
which  I  personally  do  not  take  in  directly,  appliances  of 
cook,  carpenter,  or  weaver,  for  example,  are  nevertheless 
unhesitatingly  classed  as  concrete,  since  they  are  directly 
connected  with  our  common  social  life. 

Relation  to  Thinking  as  a  Means  and  as  an  End 

By  contrast,  the  abstract  is  the  theoretical,  that  not  in¬ 
timately  associated  with  practical  concerns.  The  abstract 
(thinker  (the  ‘man  of  pure  science,’  as  he  is  sometimes 
Icalled)  deliberately  abstracts  from  application  in  life;  that 
lis,  he  leaves  practical  uses  out  of  account.  This,  however,  is 
W  merely  negative  statement.  What  remains  when  connec¬ 
tions  with  use  and  application  are  excluded?  Evidently  only 
what  has  to  do  with  knowing  considered  as  an  end  in  itself. 
Many  notions  in  science  are  abstract,  not  only  because  they 
cannot  be  understood  without  a  long  apprenticeship  in  the 


FROM  CONCRETE  TO  ABSTRACT  223 

science  (which  is  equally  true  of  technical  matters  in  the 
arts) ,  but  also  because  the  whole  content  of  their  meaning 
has  been  framed  for  the  sole  purpose  of  facilitating  further 
knowledge,  inquiry,  and  speculation.  When  thinking  is  used 
as  a  means  to  some  end,  good,  or  value  beyond  itself,  it 
is  concrete;  when  it  is  employed  simply  as  a  means  to 
more  thinking,  it  is  abstract.  To  a  theorist  an  idea  is  ade¬ 
quate  and  self-contained  just  because  it  engages  and 
rewards  thought;  to  a  medical  practitioner,  an  engineer, 
an  artist,  a  merchant,  a  politician,  it  is  complete  only 
when  employed  in  the  furthering  of  some  interest  in  life  — 
health,  wealth,  beauty,  goodness,  success,  or  what  you 
will. 


Depreciation  of  ‘  Mere  Theory  ’ 

The  great  majority  of  men  under  ordinary  circumstances 
find  the  practical  exigencies  of  life  almost,  if  not  quite,  coer¬ 
cive.  Their  main  business  is  the  proper  conduct  of  their  af¬ 
fairs.  Whatever  is  of  significance  only  as  affording  scope  for 
thinking  is  pallid  and  remote  —  almost  artificial.  Hence  the 
contempt  felt  by  the  practical  and  successful  executive  for 
the  ‘  mere  theorist  ’ ;  hence  his  conviction  that  certain 
things  may  be  all  very  well  in  theory,  but  that  they  will 
not  do  in  practice;  hence,  in  general,  the  depreciatory  way 
in  which  he  uses  the  terms  abstract,  theoretical,  and  intel¬ 
lectual. 

This  attitude  is  justified,  of  course,  under  certain  condi¬ 
tions.  But  depreciation  of  theory  does  not  contain  the  whole 
truth,  as  common  or  practical  sense  recognizes.  There  is 
such  a  thing,  even  from  the  common-sense  standpoint,  as 
being  ‘  too  practical,’  as  being  so  intent  upon  the  immedi¬ 
ately  practical  as  not  to  see  beyond  the  end  of  one’s  nose 
or  as  to  cut  off  the  limb  upon  which  one  is  sitting.  The  ques¬ 
tion  is  one  of  limits,  of  degrees  and  adjustments,  rather  than 


HOW  WE  THINK 


224 

one  of  absolute  separation.  Truly  practical  men  give  their 
minds  free  play  about  a  subject  without  asking  too  closely 
at  every  point  for  any  advantage  to  be  gained.  Exclusive 
preoccupation  with  matters  of  use  and  application  narrows 
the  horizon  and  in  the  long  run  defeats  itself.  It  does  not 
pay  to  tether  one's  thoughts  to  the  post  of  use  with  too  short 
a  rope.  Power  in  action  requires  largeness  of  vision,  which 
can  be  had  only  through  the  use  of  imagination.  Men  must 
at  least  have  enough  interest  in  thinking  for  the  sake  of 
thinking  to  escape  the  limitations  of  routine  and  custom. 
Interest  in  knowledge  for  the  sake  of  knowledge,  in  thinking 
for  the  sake  of  the  free  play  of  thought,  is  necessary  to  the 
emancipation  of  practical  life  —  to  making  it  rich  and  pro¬ 
gressive. 

We  now  recur  to  the  pedagogic  maxim  of  going  from  the 
concrete  to  the  abstract  and  call  attention  to  three  aspects 
of  the  process. 

Beginning  with  Practical  Manipulations 

1.  Since  the  concrete  denotes  thinking  applied  to  activi¬ 
ties  for  the  sake  of  dealing  with  difficulties  that  present 
themselves  practically,  ‘  begin  with  the  concrete  ’  signifies 
that  we  should,  at  the  outset  of  any  new  experience  in  learn¬ 
ing,  make  much  of  what  is  already  familiar,  and  if  possible 
connect  the  new  topics  and  principles  with  the  pursuit  of 
an  end  in  some  active  occupation.  We  do  not  '  follow  the 
order  of  nature '  when  we  multiply  mere  sensations  or  ac¬ 
cumulate  physical  objects.  Instruction  in  number  is  not  con¬ 
crete  merely  because  splints  or  beans  or  dots  are  employed. 
Whenever  the  use  and  bearing  of  number  relations  are  clearly 
perceived,  a  number  idea  is  concrete  even  if  figures  alone  are 
used.  Just  what  sort  of  symbol  it  is  best  to  use  at  a  given 
time  —  whether  blocks,  or  lines,  or  figures  —  is  entirely  a 
matter  of  adjustment  to  the  given  case.  If  the  physical 
things  used  in  teaching  number  or  geography  or  anything 


PROM  CONCRETE  TO  ABSTRACT  226 

else  do  not  leave  the  mind  illuminated  with  recognition  of 
a  meaning  beyond  themselves,  the  instruction  that  uses  them 
is  as  abstruse  as  that  which  doles  out  ready-made  definitions 
and  rules,  for  it  distracts  attention  from  ideas  to  mere  physi¬ 
cal  excitations. 

The  notion  that  we  have  only  to  put  physical  objects  be¬ 
fore  the  senses  in  order  to  impress  ideas  upon  the  mind 
amounts  almost  to  a  superstition.  The  introduction  of  ob¬ 
ject  lessons  and  sense-training  scored  a  distinct  advance 
over  the  prior  method  of  linguistic  symbols,  but  this  ad¬ 
vance  tended  to  blind  educators  to  the  fact  that  only  a  half¬ 
way  step  had  been  taken.  Things  and  sensations  develop 
the  child,  indeed,  but  only  when  he  uses  them  in  mastering 
his  body  and  coordinating  his  actions.  Continuous  occupa¬ 
tions  involve  the  use  of  natural  materials,  tools,  modes  of 
energy,  and  do  it  in  a  way  that  compels  thinking  as  to  how 
they  are  related  to  one  another  and  to  the  realization  of 
ends.  But  the  mere  isolated  presentation  of  things  to  sense 
remains  barren  and  dead.  A  few  generations  ago  the  great 
obstacle  in  the  way  of  reform  of  primary  education  was  be¬ 
lief  in  the  almost  magical  efficacy  of  the  symbols  of  lan¬ 
guage  (including  number)  to  produce  mental  training;  at 
present,  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  objects  just  as  objects  blocks 
the  way.  As  frequently  happens,  the  better  is  an  enemy  of 
the  best- 


Transferring  Interest  to  Intellectual  Matters 

2.  The  interest  in  results,  in  the  successful  carrying  on  of 
an  activity,  should  be  gradually  transferred  to  the  study  of 
objects  —  their  properties,  consequences,  structures,  causes, 
and  effects.  The  adult  when  at  work  in  his  life  calling  is 
rarely  free  to  devote  time  or  energy  —  beyond  the  necessi¬ 
ties  of  his  immediate  action  —  to  the  study  of  what  he  deals 
with.^  The  educative  activities  of  childhood  should  be.  ao 
^  See  page  50, 


HOW  WE  THINK 


226 

arranged  that  the  activity  creates  a  demand  for  attention 
to  matters  that  have  only  an  indirect  and  an  intellectual 
connection  with  the  original  activity.  To  take  an  instance 
to  which  reference  has  already  been  made,  the  direct  interest 
in  carpentering  or  shop  work  should  gradually  pass  into  an 
interest  in  geometric  and  mechanical  problems.  The  inter¬ 
est  in  cooking  should  grow  into  an  interest  in  chemical  ex¬ 
perimentation  and  the  physiology  and  hygiene  of  bodily 
growth.  The  original  casual  making  of  pictures  should  pass 
to  an  interest  in  the  technique  of  representation  of  perspec¬ 
tive,  the  handling  of  brush,  pigments,  etc.  This  development 
is  what  the  term  "  go  ”  signifies  in  the  maxim  "  go  from  the 
concrete  to  the  abstract";  it  represents  the  dynamic  and 
educative  phase  of  the  process. 

Developing  Delight  in  Thinking 

3.  The  outcome,  the  abstract  to  which  education  is  to 
proceed,  is  an  interest  in  intellectual  matters  for  their  own 
sake,  a  delight  in  thinking  for  the  sake  of  thinking.  It  is  an 
old  story  that  acts  and  processes  that  at  the  outset  are  inci¬ 
dental  to  something  else  develop  and  maintain  an  absorbing 
value  of  their  own.  So  it  is  with  thinking  and  with  knowl¬ 
edge;  at  first  incidental  to  results  and  adjustments  beyond 
themselves,  they  attract  more  and  more  attention  to  them¬ 
selves  till  they  become  ends,  not  means.  Children  engage, 
unconstrainedly  and  continually,  in  reflective  inspection  and 
testing  for  the  sake  of  what  they  are  interested  in  doing. 
Habits  of  thinking  thus  generated  may  increase  in  amount 
till  they  become  of  importance  on  their  own  account.  It  is 
part  of  the  business  of  a  teacher  to  lead  students  to  extricate 
and  dwell  upon  the  distinctively  intellectual  side  of  what 
they  do  until  there  develops  a  spontaneous  interest  in  ideas 
and  their  relations  with  one  another  —  that  is,  a  genuine 
power  of  abstraction,  of  rising  from  engrossment  in  the 
present  to  the  plane  of  ideas. 


FROM  CONCRETE  TO  ABSTRACT  227 


II.  What  Is  the  Abstract? 

Examples  of  the  Transition  from  Concrete  to  Abstract 

The  three  instances  cited  in  Chapter  VI  represent  an 
ascending  cycle  from  the  concrete  to  the  abstract.  Taking 
thought  to  keep  a  personal  engagement  is  obviously  of  the 
concrete  kind.  Endeavoring  to  work  out  the  meaning  of  a 
certain  part  of  a  boat  is  an  instance  of  an  intermediate  kind. 
The  original  reason  for  the  existence  and  position  of  the 
pole  is  practical,  so  that  to  the  designer  the  problem  was 
purely  concrete  —  the  maintenance  of  a  certain  system  of 
action,  But  for  the  passenger  on  the  boat,  the  problem  was 
theoretical,  more  or  less  speculative.  It  made  no  difference 
to  his  reaching  his  destination  whether  he  worked  out  the 
meaning  or  not.  The  third  case,  that  of  the  appearance  and 
movement  of  the  bubbles,  illustrates  a  strictly  abstract  case. 
No  overcoming  of  physical  obstacles,  no  adjustment  of  ex¬ 
ternal  means  to  ends,  is  at  stake.  Curiosity,  intellectual 
curiosity,  is  challenged  by  a  seemingly  anomalous  occur¬ 
rence  ;  and  thinking  tries  simply  to  account  for  an  apparent 
exception  in  terms  of  recognized  principles.  Intellectual 
means  are  adjusted  to  an  intellectual  result. 

Abstract  Thinking  Not  the  Whole  End  and  Not  Congenial  to 
Most  Persons 

Abstract  thinking,  it  should  be  noted,  represents  an  end, 
not  the  end.  The  power  of  sustained  thinking  on  matters 
remote  from  direct  use  is  an  outgrowth  of  thinking  on  prac¬ 
tical  and  immediate  matters,  but  not  a  substitute  for  it.  The 
educational  end  is  not  the  destruction  of  power  to  think 
practically  in  overcoming  obstacles,  utilizing  resources,  and 
achieving  ends;  it  is  not  its  replacement  by  abstract  reflec- 


228  HOW  WE  THINK 

tion.  Nor  is  theoretical  thinking  a  higher  type  of  thinking 
than  practical.  A  person  who  has  at  command  both  types 
of  thinking  is  of  a  higher  order  than  he  who  possesses  only 
one.  Methods  that,  in  developing  abstract  intellectual  abili¬ 
ties,  weaken  habits  of  practical  or  concrete  thinking  fall  as 
much  short  of  the  educational  ideal  as  do  the  methods  that, 
in  cultivating  ability  to  plan,  to  invent,  to  arrange,  to  fore¬ 
cast,  fail  to  secure  some  delight  in  thinking,  irrespective  of 
practical  consequences. 

Educators  should  also  note  the  very  great  individual  dif¬ 
ferences  that  exist;  they  should  not  try  to  force  one  pattern 
and  model  upon  all.  In  many  (probably  the  majority)  the 
executive  tendency,  the  habit  of  mind  that  thinks  for  pur¬ 
poses  of  conduct  and  achievement,  not  for  the  sake  of  know¬ 
ing,  remains  dominant  to  the  end.  Engineers,  lawyers,  doc¬ 
tors,  merchants,  are  much  more  numerous  in  adult  life  than 
scientists  and  philosophers.  While  education  should  strive 
to  make  men  who,  however  prominent  their  professional  in¬ 
terests  and  aims,  partake  of  the  spirit  of  the  scholar,  philoso¬ 
pher,  and  scientist,  no  good  reason  appears  why  education 
should  esteem  the  one  mental  habit  inherently  superior  to 
the  other  and  deliberately  try  to  transform  the  type  from 
concrete  to  abstract.  Have  not  our  schools  been  one-sidedly 
devoted  to  the  more  abstract  tj^pe  of  thinking,  thus  doing 
injustice  to  the  majority  of  pupils?  Has  not  the  idea  of  a 
‘  liberal  ’  and  ‘  humane  '  education  tended  too  often  in  prac¬ 
tice  to  the  production  of  technical,  because  overspecialized, 
thinkers? 

Education  Should  Aim  to  Secure  a  Working  Balance 

The  aim  of  education  should  be  to  secure  a  balanced  in¬ 
teraction  of  the  two  types  of  mental  attitude,  having  suffi¬ 
cient  regard  to  the  disposition  of  the  individual  not  to 
hamper  and  cripple  whatever  powers  are  naturally  strong 


FROM  CONCRETE  TO  ABSTRACT  229 

in  him.  The  narro'wnesa  of  individuals  of  strong  concrete 
bent  needs  to  be  liberalized.  Every  opportunity  that  occurs 
within  practical  activities  for  developing  curiosity  and  sus¬ 
ceptibility  to  intellectual  problems  should  be  seized.  Vio¬ 
lence  is  not  done  to  natural  disposition;  rather  the  latter  is 
broadened.  Otherwise,  the  concrete  becomes  narrowing  and 
deadening.  As  regards  the  smaller  number  of  those  who  have 
a  taste  for  abstract,  purely  intellectual  topics,  pains  should 
be  taken  to  multiply  opportunities  for  the  application  of 
ideas,  for  translating  symbolic  truths  into  terms  of  everyday 
and  social  life.  Every  human  being  has  both  capabilities, 
and  every  individual  will  be  more  effective  and  happier  if 
both  powers  are  developed  in  easy  and  close  interaction  with 
each  other.  Otherwise  the  abstract  becomes  identical  with 
the  academic  and  pedantic. 


CHAPTER  SIXTEEN 


LANGUAGE  AND  THE  TRAINING 
OF  THOUGHT 


I.  Language  as  the  Tool  op  Thinking 

Language  has  such  a  peculiarly  intimate  connection  with 
thought  as  to  require  special  discussion.  The  very  word 
logic,  coming  from  logos  (Xiyos),  means  indifferently  both 
word  or  speech  and  thought  or  reason.  Yet  “  words,  words, 
words  ’’  denote  intellectual  barrenness,  a  sham  of  thought. 
Schooling  has  language  as  its  chief  instrument  (and  often 
as  its  chief  subject  matter)  of  study.  Yet  educational  re¬ 
formers  have  for  centuries  brought  their  severest  indict¬ 
ments  against  the  current  use  of  language  in  the  schools. 
The  conviction  that  language  is  necessary  to  thinking  (is 
even  identical  with  it)  is  met  by  the  contention  that  lan¬ 
guage  perverts  and  conceals  thought.  There  is  a  genuine 
problem  here. 

Views  of  the  Relation  of  Thought  and  Language 

Three  typical  views  have  been  maintained  regarding  the 
relation  of  thought  and  language:  first,  that  they  are  identic 
cal ;  second,  that  words  are  the  garb,  or  clothing,  of  thought, 
necessary  not  for  thought  but  only  for  conveying  it;  and 
third  (the  view  we  shall  here  maintain) ,  that,  while  lan¬ 
guage  is  not  thought,  it  is  necessary  for  thinking  as  well  as 
for  communication.  When  it  is  said,  however,  that  think¬ 
ing  is  impossible  without  language,  we  must  recall  that 
language  includes  much  more  than  oral  and  written  speech. 


language  and  training  thought  231 

Gestures,  pictures,  monuments,  visual  images,  finger  move¬ 
ments  —  anything  deliberately  and  artificially  employed  as 
a  sign  is,  logically,  language.  To  say  that  language  is  neces¬ 
sary  for  thinking  is  to  say  that  signs  are  necessary.  Thought 
deals  not  with  bare  things,  but  with  their  meanings,  their 
suggestions;  and  meanings,  in  order  to  be  apprehended,  must 
be  embodied  in  sensible  and  particular  existences.  Without 
meaning,  things  are  nothing  but  blind  stimuli,  brute  things, 
or  chance  sources  of  pleasure  and  pain;  and  since  meanings 
are  not  themselves  tangible  things,  they  must  be  anchored 
by  attachment  to  some  physical  existence.  Existences  that 
are  especially  set  aside  to  fixate  and  convey  meanings  are 
symbols.  If  a  man  moves  toward  another  to  throw  him  out 
of  the  room,  his  movement  is  not  a  sign.  If,  however,  the  man 
points  to  the  door  with  his  hand,  or  utters  the  sound  go,  his 
act  becomes  a  vehicle  of  meaning;  it  is  a  sign,  not  a 
complete  thing  in  itself.  In  the  case  of  signs  we  care  nothing 
for  what  they  are  in  themselves,  but  everything  for  what 
they  signify  and  represent.  Canis,  Hund,  chien,  dog  —  it 
makes  no  difference  what  the  outward  thing  is,  so  long  as 
the  meaning  is  presented. 

Natural  objects  are  signs  of  other  things  and  events. 
Clouds  stand  for  rain;  a  footprint  represents  game  or  an 
enemy;  a  projecting  rock  serves  to  indicate  minerals  below 
the  surface.  The  limitations  of  natural  signs  are,  however, 
great.  First,  physical  or  direct  sense  excitation  tends  to  dis¬ 
tract  attention  from  what  is  meant  or  indicated.  Almost 
every  one  will  recall  pointing  out  to  a  kitten  or  puppy  an 
object  of  food,  only  to  have  the  animal  devote  himself  to 
the  hand  pointing,  not  to  the  thing  pointed  at.  Second,  where 
natural  signs  alone  exist,  we  are  mainly  at  the  mercy  of  ex¬ 
ternal  happenings;  we  have  to  wait  until  the  natural  event 
presents  itself  in  order  to  be  warned  or  advised  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  some  other  event.  Third,  natural  signs,  not  being 


HOW  WE  THINK 


232 

originally  intended  to  be  signs,  are  cumbrous,  bulky,  in¬ 
convenient,  unmanageable.  A  symbol,  on  the  contrary,  is 
intended  and  invented,  like  any  artificial  tool  and  utensil, 
for  the  purpose  of  conveying  meaning. 

Aspects  of  Artificial  Signs  That  Favor  Their  Use  to  Represent 

Meanings 

It  is  therefore  indispensable  for  any  high  development 
of  thought  that  there  exist  intentional  signs.  Language 
supplies  the  requirement.  Gestures,  sounds,  vrritten  or 
printed  forms,  are  strictly  physical  existences,  but  their 
native  value  is  intentionally  subordinated  to  the  value  they 
acquire  as  representative  of  meanings.  There  are  three  as¬ 
pects  of  artificial  signs  that  favor  their  use  as  representa¬ 
tives  of  meanings: 

First,  the  direct  and  sensible  value  of  faint  sounds  and 
minute  written  or  printed  marks  is  very  slight.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  attention  is  not  distracted  from  their  representative 
function. 

Second,  their  production  is  under  our  direct  control,  so 
that  they  may  be  produced  when  needed.  When  we  can 
make  the  word  rain,  we  do  not  have  to  wait  for  some  physi¬ 
cal  forerunner  of  rain  to  call  our  thoughts  in  that  direction. 
We  cannot  make  the  cloud;  we  can  make  the  sound,  and  as 
a  token  of  meaning  the  sound  serves  the  purpose  as  well  as 
the  cloud. 

Third,  arbitrary  linguistic  signs  are  convenient  and  easy 
to  manage.  They  are  compact,  portable,  and  delicate.  As 
long  as  we  live  we  breathe,  and  modifications  by  the  muscles 
of  throat  and  mouth  of  the  volume  and  quality  of  the  air 
are  simple,  easy,  and  indefinitely  controllable.  Bodily  pos¬ 
tures  and  gestures  of  the  hand  and  arm  are  also  employed 
as  signs,  but  they  are  coarse  and  unmanageable  compared 
with  modifications  of  breath  to  produce  sounds.  No  wonder 


LANGUAGE  AND  TRAINING  THOUGHT  233 
that  oral  speech  has  been  selected  as  the  main  stuff  of  in¬ 
tentional  intellectual  signs.  Sounds,  while  subtle,  refined, 
and  easily  modifiable,  are  transitory.  This  defect  is  met  by 
the  system  of  written  and  printed  words,  appealing  to  the 
eye.  Litera  scripta  manet. 

Bearing  in  mind  the  intimate  connection  of  meanings  and 
signs  (or  language) ,  we  may  note  in  more  detail  what  lan¬ 
guage  does  (1)  for  specific  meanings,  and  (2)  for  the  organi¬ 
zation  of  meanings. 

Language  Selects,  Preserves,  and  Applies  Specific  Meanings 

In  the  case  of  specific  meanings  a  verbal  sign  (ct)  selects, 
detaches,  a  meaning  from  what  is  otherwise  a  vague  flux 
and  blur  (see  p.  141) ;  (h)  retains,  registers,  stores  that 
meaning;  and  (c)  applies  it,  when  needed,  to  the  compre¬ 
hension  of  other  things.  Combining  these  various  functions 
in  a  mixture  of  metaphors,  we  may  say  that  a  linguistic  sign 
is  a^nce,  a  label,  and  a  vehicle — ’all  in  one. 

The  Word  as  a  Fence.  Everyone  has  experienced  how 
learning  an  appropriate  name  for  what  was  dim  and  vague 
cleared  up  and  crystallized  the  whole  matter.  Some  mean¬ 
ing  seems  almost  within  reach,  but  is  elusive;  it  refuses  to 
condense  into  definite  form;  the  attaching  of  a  word  some¬ 
how  (just  how,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  say)  puts  limits 
around  the  meaning,  draws  it  out  from  the  void,  makes  it 
stand  out  as  an  entity  on  its  own  account.  When  Emerson 
said  that  he  would  almost  rather  know  the  true  name,  the 
poet’s  name,  for  a  thing,  than  to  know  the  thing  itself,  he 
presumably  had  this  irradiating  and  illuminating  function 
of  language  in  mind.  The  delight  that  children  take  in  de¬ 
manding  and  learning  the  names  of  everything  about  them 
indicates  that  meanings  are  becoming  concrete  individuals 
to  them,  so  that  their  commerce  with  things  is  passing  from 
the  physical  to  the  intellectual  plane.  It  is  hardly  surprising 


234  HOW  WE  THINK 

that  savages  attach  a  magical  efficacy  to  words,  To  name 
anything  is  to  give  it  a  title,  to  dignify  and  honor  it  by 
raising  it  from  a  mere  physical  occurrence  to  a  meaning  that 
is  distinct  and  permanent.  To  know  the  names  of  people  and 
things  and  to  be  able  to  manipulate  these  names  is,  in  sav¬ 
age  lore,  to  be  in  possession  of  their  dignity  and  worth,  to 
maiffer  them. 

r  y/b.  The  Word  as  a  Label.  Things  come  and  go,  or  we  come 
and  go,  and  either  way  things  escape  our  notice.  Our  direct 
sensible  relation  to  things  is  very  limited.  The  suggestion  of 
meanings  by  natural  signs  is  limited  to  occasions  of  direct 
contact  or  vision.  But  a  meaning  fixed  by  a  linguistic  sign 
is  conserved  for  future  use.  Even  if  the  thing  is  not  there 
to  represent  the  meaning,  the  word  may  be  produced  so  as 
to  evoke  the  meaning.  Since  intellectual  life  depends  on  pos¬ 
session  of  a  store  of  meanings,  the  importance  of  language 
as  a  tool  of  preserving  meanings  cannot  be  overstated.  To 
be  sure,  the  method  of  storage  is  not  wholly  aseptic ;  words 
often  corrupt  and  modify  the  meanings  they  are  supposed 
to  keep  intact,  but  liability  to  infection  is  a  price  paid  by 
every  living  thing  for  the  privilege  of  living. 

The  Word  as  a  Vehicle,  When  a  meaning  is  detached 
and  fixed  by  a  sign,  it  is  possible  to  use  that  meaning  in  a 
new  context  and  situation.  This  transfer  and  reapplication 
is  the  key  to  all  judgment  and  inference.  It  would  little 
profit  a  man  to  recognize  that  a  given  particular  cloud  was 
the  premonitor  of  a  given  particular  rainstorm  if  his  recog¬ 
nition  ended  there,  for  he  would  then  have  to  learn  over  and 
over  again,  since  the  next  cloud  and  the  next  rain  are  differ¬ 
ent  events.  No  cumulative  growth  of  intelligence  would  oc¬ 
cur.  Experience  might  form  habits  of  physical  adaptation 
but  it  would  not  teach  anything,  for  we  should  not  be  able 
to  use  an  old  experience  consciously  to  anticipate  and  regu¬ 
late  a  new  experience.  To  be  able  to  use  the  past  to  judge 


language  and  training  thought  235 

and  infer  the  new  and  unknown  implies  that,  although  the 
past  thing  has  gone,  its  meaning  abides  in  such  a  way  as 
to  be  applicable  in  determining  the  character  of  the  new. 
Speech  forms  are  our  great  carriers,  the  easy-running  vehi¬ 
cles  by  which  meanings  are  transported  from  experiences 
that  no  longer  concern  us  to  those  that  are  as  yet  dark  and 
dubious. 

Language  Signs  Are  Instruments  for  Organizing  Meanings 

In  emphasizing  the  importance  of  signs  in  relation  to  spe¬ 
cific  meanings,  we  have  overlooked  another  aspect,  equally 
valuable.  Signs  not  only  mark  off  specific  or  individual 
meanings,  but  they  are  also  instruments  of  grouping  mean¬ 
ings  in  relation  to  one  another.  Words  are  not  only  names 
or  titles  of  single  meanings;  they  also  form  sentences  in 
which  meanings  are  organized  in  relation  to  one  another, 
When  we  say  “  That  book  is  a  dictionary,”  or  “  That  blur 
of  light  in  the  heavens  is  Halley’s  comet,”  we  express  a 
logical  connection —  an  act  of  classifying  and  defining  that 
goes  beyond  the  physical  thing  into  the  logical  region  of 
genera  and  species,  thing.s  and  attributes.  Propositions,  sen¬ 
tences,  bear  the  same  relation  to  judgments  that  distinct 
words,  built  up  mainly  by  analyzing  propositions  in  their 
various  types,  bear  to  meanings  or  conceptions;  and  just  as 
words  imply  a  sentence,  so  a  sentence  implies  a  larger  whole 
of  consecutive  discourse  into  which  it  fits.  As  is  often  said, 
grammar  expresses  the  unconscious  logic  of  the  popular 
mind.  The  chief  intellectual  classifications  that  constitute 
the  working  capital  of  thought  have  been  built  up  for  us  by 
our  mother  tongue.  Our  very  lack  of  explicit  consciousness, 
when  using  language,  that  we  are  then  employing  the  intel¬ 
lectual  systematizations  of  the  race  shows  how  thoroughly 
accustomed  we  have  become  to  its  logical  distinctions  and 
groupings. 


236 


HOW  WE  THINK 


11.  The  Abuse  of  Linguistic  Methods  in  Education 
Teaching  Things  Alone,  the  Negation  of  Education 

Taken  literally,  the  maxim,  ‘Teach  things,  not  words,' 
or  ‘  Teach  things  before  words,’  would  be  the  negation  of 
education;  it  would  reduce  mental  life  to  mere  physical  and 
sensible  adjustments.  Learning,  in  the  proper  sense,  is  not 
learning  things,  but  the  meanings  of  things,  and  this  process 
involves  the  use  of  signs,  or  language  in  its  generic  sense. 
In  like  fashion,  the  warfare  of  some  educational  reformers 
against  symbols,  if  pushed  to  extremes,  involves  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  intellectual  life,  since  this  lives,  moves,  and  has 
its  being  in  those  processes  of  definition,  abstraction,  gen¬ 
eralization,  and  classification  that  are  made  possible  by 
symbols  alone.  Nevertheless,  these  contentions  of  educa¬ 
tional  reformers  have  been  needed.  The  liability  of  a  thing 
to  abuse  is  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  its  right  use. 

The  Limitations  and  Dangers  of  Symbols  in  Relation  to 
Meanings 

Symbols  themselves,  as  already  pointed  out,  are  particu¬ 
lar,  physical,  sensible  existences,  like  any  other  things.  They 
are  symbols  only  by  virtue  of  what  they  suggest  and  repre¬ 
sent;  i.e.,  meanings. 

In  the  first  place,  they  stand  for  these  meanings  to  any 
individual  only  when  he  has  had  experience  of  some  situa¬ 
tion  to  which  these  meanings  are  actually  relevant.  Words 
can  detach  and  preserve  a  meaning  only  when  the  meaning 
has  been  first  involved  in  our  own  direct  intercourse  with 
things.  To  attempt  to  give  a  meaning  through  a  word  alone 
without  any  dealings  with  a  thing  is  to  deprive  the  word  of 
intelligible  signification;  against  this  attempt,  a  tendency 


language  and  training  thought  237 

only  too  prevalent  in  education,  reformers  have  protested. 
Moreover,  there  is  a  tendency  to  assume  that,  whenever 
there  is  a  definite  word  or  form  of  speech,  there  is  also  a  defi¬ 
nite  idea;  while,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  adults  and  children 
alike  are  capable  of  using  even  formula  that  are  verbally 
precise  with  only  the  vaguest  and  most  confused  sense  of 
what  they  mean.  Genuine  ignorance  is  more  profitable  be¬ 
cause  it  is  likely  to  be  accompanied  by  humility,  curiosity, 
and  open-mindedness;  whereas  ability  to  repeat  catch- 
phrases,  cant  terms,  familiar  propositions,  gives  the  con¬ 
ceit  of  learning  and  coats  the  mind  with  a  varnish  water¬ 
proof  to  new  ideas. 

In  the  second  place,  although  new  combinations  of  words 
without  the  intervention  of  physical  things  may  supply  new 
ideas,  there  are  limits  to  this  possibility.  Lazy  inertness 
causes  individuals  to  accept  ideas  that  have  currency  about 
them  without  personal  inquiry  and  testing.  A  man  uses 
thought,  perhaps,  to  find  out  what  others  believe,  and  then 
stops.  The  ideas  of  others  as  embodied  in  language  become 
substitutes  for  one’s  own  ideas.  The  use  of  linguistic  studies 
and  methods  to  halt  the  human  mind  on  the  level  of  the 
attainments  of  the  past,  to  prevent  new  inquiry  and  dis¬ 
covery,  to  put  the  authority  of  tradition  in  place  of  the 
authority  of  natural  facts  and  laws,  to  reduce  the  indi¬ 
vidual  to  a  parasite  living  on  the  secondhand  experience  of 
others  —  these  things  have  been  the  source  of  the  reformers’ 
protest  against  the  preeminence  assigned  to  language  in 
schools. 

In  the  third  place,  words  that  originally  stood  for  ideas 
come,  with  repeated  use,  to  be  mere  counters;  they  become 
physical  things  to  be  manipulated  according  to  certain  rules 
or  reacted  to  by  certain  operations  without  consciousness 
of  their  meaning.  Mr.  Stout  (who  has  called  such  terms 
"  substitute  signs  ”)  remarks  that  “  algebraical  and  arith- 


HOW  WE  THINK 


238 

metical  signs  are  to  a  great  extent  used  as  mere  substitute 
signs.  ...  It  is  possible  to  use  signs  of  this  kind  whenever 
fixed  and  definite  rules  of  operation  can  be  derived  from 
the  nature  of  the  things  symbolized,  so  as  to  be  applied  in 
manipulating  the  signs,  without  further  reference  to  their 
signification.  A  word  is  an  instrument  for  thinking  about 
the  meaning  which  it  expresses;  a  substitute  sign  is  a  means 
of  not  thinking  about  the  meaning  which  it  symbolizes.” 
The  principle  applies,  however,  to  ordinary  words,  as  well 
as  to  algebraic  signs;  they  also  enable  us  to  use  meanings 
so  as  to  get  results  without  thinking.  In  many  respects,  signs 
that  are  means  of  not  thinking  are  of  great  advantage; 
standing  for  the  familiar,  they  release  attention  for  mean¬ 
ings  that,  being  novel,  require  conscious  interpretation. 
Nevertheless,  the  premium  put  in  the  schoolroom  upon  at¬ 
tainment  of  technical  facility,  upon  skill  in  producing  ex¬ 
ternal  results,^  often  changes  this  advantage  into  a  positive 
detriment.  In  manipulating  symbols  so  as  to  recite  well,  to 
get  and  give  correct  answers,  to  follow  prescribed  formulae 
of  analysis,  the  pupil's  attitude  becomes  mechanical,  rather 
than  thoughtful;  verbal  memorizing  is  substituted  for  in¬ 
quiry  into  the  meaning  of  things.  This  danger  is  perhaps 
the  one  uppermost  in  mind  when  verbal  methods  of  educa¬ 
tion  are  attacked. 


III.  The  Use  of  Language  in  its  Educational  Beabings 

Language  stands  in  a  twofold  relation  to  the  work  of  edu¬ 
cation.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  continually  used  in  all  studies 
as  well  as  in  all  the  social  discipline  of  the  school;  on  the 
other,  it  is  a  distinct  object  of  study.  We  shall  consider  only 
the  ordinary  use  of  language,  since  its  effects  upon  habits 

I  See  page  64. 


language  and  training  thought  239 

of  thought  are  much  deeper  than  those  of  conscious  linguistic 
study,  for  the  latter  only  makes  explicit  what  speech  already 
contains, 

The  common  statement  that  "  language  is  the  expression 
of  thought  ”  conveys  only  a  half-truth,  and  a  half-truth  that 
is  likely  to  result  in  positive  error.  Language  does  express 
thought,  but  not  primarily,  nor,  at  first,  even  consciously. 
The  primary  motive  for  language  is  to  influence  (through 
the  expression  of  desire,  emotion,  and  thought)  the  activity 
of  others ;  its  secondary  use  is  to  enter  into  more  intimate  so¬ 
ciable  relations  with  them;  its  employment  as  a  conscious 
vehicle  of  thought  and  knowledge  is  a  tertiary,  and  rela¬ 
tively  late,  formation.  The  contrast  is  well  brought  out  by 
the  statement  of  John  Locke  that  words  have  a  double  use, 
"  civil  ”  and  "  philosophical.”  "  By  their  civil  use,  I  mean 
such  a  communication  of  thoughts  and  ideas  by  words  as 
may  serve  for  the  upholding  of  common  conversation  and 
commerce  about  the  ordinary  affairs  and  conveniences  of 
civil  life.  ,  .  .  By  the  philosophical  use  of  words,  I  mean 
such  a  use  of  them  as  may  serve  to  convey  the  precise  no¬ 
tions  of  things  and  to  express  in  general  propositions  certain 
and  undoubted  truths.” 

Education  Has  to  Transform  Language  into  an  Intellectual 

Tool 

This  distinction  of  the  practical  and  social  from  the  intel¬ 
lectual  use  of  language  throws  much  light  on  the  problem 
of  the  school  in  respect  to  speech.  That  problem  is  to  direct 
pupils’  oral  and  written  speech,  used  primarily  jor  practical 
and  social  ends,  so  that  gradually  it  shall  become  a  conscious 
tool  of  conveying  knowledge  and  assisting  thought.  How 
without  checking  the  spontaneous,  natural  motives  —  mo¬ 
tives  to  which  language  owes  its  vitality,  force,  vividness, 
and  variety  —  are  we  to  modify  speech  habits  so  as  to 


240  HOW  WE  THINK 

render  them  accurate  and  flexible  intellectual  instruments? 
It  is  comparatively  easy  to  encourage  the  original  spontane¬ 
ous  flow  and  not  make  language  over  into  a  servant  of  re¬ 
flective  thought;  it  is  comparatively  easy  to  check  and  al¬ 
most  destroy  (so  far  as  the  schoolroom  is  concerned)  native 
aim  and  interest  and  to  set  up  artificial  and  formal  modes 
of  expression  in  some  isolated  and  technical  matters.  The 
difficulty  lies  in  making  over  habits  that  have  to  do  with 
“  ordinary  affairs  and  conveniences  ’’  into  habits  concerned 
with  "  precise  notions."  The  successful  accomplishing  of  the 
transformation  requires  (a)  enlarging  the  pupil's  vocabu¬ 
lary,  (b)  rendering  its  terms  more  precise  and  accurate, 
and  (c)  forming  habits  of  consecutive  discourse. 

a.  Enlarging  the  Vocabulary.  This  takes  place,  of  course, 
by  wider  intelligent  contact  with  things  and  persons,  and 
also  vicariously,  by  gathering  the  meanings  of  words  from 
the  context  in  which  they  are  heard  or  read.  To  grasp  by 
either  method  a  word  in  its  meaning  is  to  exercise  intelli¬ 
gence,  to  perform  an  act  of  intelligent  selection  or  analysis, 
and  it  is  also  to  widen  the  fund  of  meanings  or  concepts 
readily  available  in  further  intellectual  enterprises.^  It  is 
usual  to  distinguish  between  one's  active  and  one’s  passive 
vocabulary,  the  latter  being  composed  of  the  words  that  are 
understood  when  they  are  heard  or  seen,  the  former  of 
words  that  are  used  intelligently.  The  fact  that  the  passive 
is  very  much  larger  than  the  active  vocabulary  indi¬ 
cates  power  not  controlled  or  utilized  by  the  individual. 
Failure  to  use  meanings  that  are  understood  may  reveal  de¬ 
pendence  upon  external  stimulus  and  lack  of  intellectual 
initiative.  This  condition  is  to  some  extent  an  artificial 
product  of  education.  Small  children  usually  attempt  to 
put  to  use  every  new  word  they  get  hold  of,  but  when  they 
learn  to  read  they  are  introduced  to  a  large  variety  of  terms 
“  See  pages  156-157 


language  and  training  thought  241 

that  they  have  no  opportunity  to  use.  The  result  is  a  kind 
of  mental  suppression,  if  not  smothering.  Moreover,  the 
meaning  of  words  not  actively  used  in  building  up  and  con¬ 
veying  ideas  is  never  quite  clear-cut  or  complete.  Action  is 
required  to  make  them  definite. 

While  a  limited  vocabulary  may  be  due  to  a  limited  range 
of  experience,  to  a  sphere  of  contact  with  persons  and  things 
BO  narrow  as  not  to  suggest  or  require  a  full  store  of  words, 
it  is  also  due  to  carelessness  and  vagueness.  A  happy-go- 
lucky  frame  of  mind  makes  the  individual  averse  to  clear 
discriminations,  either  in  perception  or  in  his  own  speech. 
Words  are  used  loosely  in  an  indeterminate  kind  of  refer¬ 
ence  to  things,  and  speech  approaches  a  condition  where 
practically  everything  is  just  a  '  thing-um-bob  ’  or  a  ‘  what- 
do-you-call-it '  a  condition  that  reacts  to  make  thought 
hopelessly  loose  and  vague.  Paucity  of  vocabulary  on  the 
part  of  those  with  whom  the  child  associates,  triviality  and 
meagerness  in  the  child’s  reading  matter  (as  frequently 
even  in  his  school  readers  and  textbooks),  tend  to  shut 
down  the  area  of  mental  vision.  Even  technical  terms  be¬ 
come  clear  when  they  are  used  to  make  either  an  idea  or  an 
object  clearer  in  meaning.  Every  self-respecting  mechanic 
will  call  the  parts  of  an  automobile  by  their  right  names 
because  that  is  the  way  to  distinguish  them.  Simplicity 
should  mean  intelligibility,  but  not  an  approach  to  baby- 
talk. 

We  must  note  also  the  great  difference  between  flow  of 
words  and  command  of  language.  Volubility  is  not  neces¬ 
sarily  a  sign  of  a  large  vocabulary;  much  talking  or  even 
ready  speech  is  quite  compatible  with  moving  round  and 
round  in  a  circle  of  moderate  radius.  Most  schoolrooms  suf¬ 
fer  from  a  lack  of  materials  and  appliances  save  perhaps 
books  —  and  even  these  are  ‘  written  down  ’  to  the  sup¬ 
posed  capacity,  or  incapacity,  of  children.  Occasion  and  de- 


HOW  WE  THINK 


242 

mand  for  an  enriched  vocabulary  are  accordingly  restricted. 
The  vocabulary  of  things  studied  in  the  schoolroom  is  very 
largely  isolated;  it  does  not  link  itself  organically  to  the 
range  of  the  ideas  and  words  that  are  in  vogue  outside  the 
school,  Hence  the  enlargement  that  takes  place  is  often 
nominal,  adding  to  the  inert,  rather  than  to  the  active,  fund 
of  meanings  and  terms. 

b.  Rendering  the  Vocabulary  More  Precise.  One  way  in 
which  the  funds  of  words  and  concepts  is  increased  is  by 
discovering  and  naming  shades  of  meaning  —  that  is  to  say, 
by  making  the  vocabulary  more  precise.  Increase  in  defi¬ 
niteness  is  as  important  relatively  as  is  the  enlargement  of 
the  capital  stock  absolutely. 

The  first  meanings  of  terms,  since  they  are  due  to  super¬ 
ficial  acquaintance  with  things,  are  ‘  general  ’  —  in  the  sense 
of  being  vague.  The  little  child  calls  all  men  'papa  ac¬ 
quainted  with  a  dog,  he  may  call  the  first  horse  he  sees  '  big 
clog.’  Differences  of  quantity  and  intensity  are  noted,  but 
the  fundamental  meaning  is  so  vague  that  it  covers  things 
that  are  far  apart.  To  many  persons  trees  are  just  trees, 
being  discriminated  only  into  deciduous  trees  and  evergreens, 
with  perhaps  recognition  of  one  or  two  kinds  of  each.  Such 
vagueness  tends  to  persist  and  to  become  a  barrier  to  the 
advance  of  thinking.  Terms  that  are  miscellaneous  in  scope 
are  clumsy  tools  at  best;  in  addition  they  are  frequently 
treacherous,  for  their  ambiguous  reference  causes  us  to  con¬ 
fuse  things  that  should  be  distinguished. 

The  growth  of  precise  terms  out  of  original  vagueness 
takes  place  normally  in  two  directions:  first,  toward  words 
that  stand  for  relationships,  and  seeond,  toward  words  that 
stand  for  highly  individualized  traits;  ”  the  first  is  associ¬ 
ated  with  abstract,  the  second  with  concrete,  thinking.  Some 
Australian  tribes  are  said  to  have  no  words  for  animal  or  for 

^  Of.  what  waa  said  about  the  development  of  meanings,  p.  142. 


language  and  training  thought  243 

plant,  while  they  have  specific  names  for  every  variety  of 
plant  and  animal  in  their  neighborhoods.  This  minuteness 
of  vocabulary  represents  progress  toward  definiteness,  but 
in  a  one-sided  way.  Specific  properties  are  distinguished,  but 
not  relationships.^  On  the  other  hand,  students  of  philoso¬ 
phy  and  of  the  general  aspects  of  natural  and  social  science 
are  apt  to  acquire  a  store  of  terms  that  signify  relations, 
without  balancing  them  up  with  terms  that  designate  spe¬ 
cific  individuals  and  traits.  The  ordinary  use  of  such  terms 
as  causation,  law,  society,  individual,  capital,  illustrates  this 
tendency. 

In  the  history  of  language  we  find  both  aspects  of  the 
growth  of  vocabulai'y  illustrated  by  changes  in  the  sense 
of  words;  some  words  originally  wide  in  their  application 
are  narrowed  to  denote  shades  of  meaning;  others  originally 
specific  are  widened  to  express  relationships.  The  term  ver¬ 
nacular,  now  meaning  mother  speech,  has  been  generalized 
from  the  word  verna,  meaning  a  slave  born  in  the  master's 
household.  Publication  has  evolved  its  meaning  of  commu¬ 
nication  by  means  of  print  through  restricting  an  earlier 
meaning  of  any  kind  of  communication  —  although  the 
wider  meaning  is  retained  in  legal  procedure,  as  publishing 
a  libel.  The  sense  of  the  word  average  has  been  generalized 
from  a  use  connected  with  dividing  loss  by  shipwreck  pro¬ 
portionately  among  various  sharers  in  an  enterprise.'^ 

These  historical  changes  assist  the  educator  to  appreci¬ 
ate  the  changes  that  occur  in  individuals  with  advance  in 
intellectual  resources.  In  studying  geometry,  a  pupil  must 
The  term  general  ia  itself  an  ambiguous  term,  meaning  (in  its 
best  logical  sense)  the  related  and  also  (in  its  natural  usage)  the  in¬ 
definite,  the  vague.  General,  in  the  first  sense,  denotes  the  discrimina¬ 
tion  of  a  principle  or  generic  relation;  in  the  second  sense,  it  denotes 
the  absence  of  discrimination  of  specific  or  individual  properties. 

®  A  large  amount  of  material  illustrating  the  twofold  change  in  the 
sense  of  words  will  be  found  in  Jevons,  Lessons  in  Logic. 


244  HOW  WE  THINK 

learn  both  to  narrow  and  to  extend  the  meanings  of  such 
familiar  words  as  line,  surface,  angle,  square,  circle  —  to 
narrow  them  to  the  precise  meanings  involved  in  demon¬ 
strations,  to  extend  them  to  cover  generic  relations  not  ex¬ 
pressed  in  ordinary  usage.  Qualities  of  color  and  size  must 
be  excluded;  relations  of  direction,  of  variation  in  direction, 
of  limit,  must  be  definitely  seized.  Thus  in  generalized  ge¬ 
ometry  the  idea  of  line  does  not  carry  any  connotation  of 
length.  To  it,  what  is  ordinarily  called  a  line  is  only  a  sec¬ 
tion  of  a  line.  A  like  transformation  occurs  in  every  subject 
of  study.  Just  at  this  point  lies  the  danger,  alluded  to  above, 
of  simply  overlaying  common  meanings  with  new  and  iso¬ 
lated  meanings  instead  of  effecting  a  genuine  working-over 
of  popular  and  practical  meanings  into  logical  concepts. 

Terms  used  with  intentional  exactness  so  as  to  express  a 
meaning,  the  whole  meaning,  and  only  the  meaning,  are 
called  technical.  For  educational  purposes,  a  technical  term 
indicates  something  relative,  not  absolute;  for  a  term  is 
technical,  not  because  of  its  verbal  form  or  its  unusualness, 
but  because  it  is  employed  to  fix  a  meaning  precisely.  Ordi¬ 
nary  words  get  a  technical  quality  when  used  intentionally 
for  this  end.  Whenever  thought  becomes  more  accurate,  a 
(relatively)  technical  vocabulary  grows  up.  Teachers  are 
apt  to  oscillate  between  extremes  in  regard  to  technical 
terms.  On  the  one  hand,  these  are  multiplied  in  every  di¬ 
rection,  seemingly  on  the  assumption  that  learning  a  new 
piece  of  terminology,  accompanied  by  verbal  description  or 
definition,  is  equivalent  to  grasping  a  new  idea.  On  the 
other  hand,  when  it  is  seen  how  largely  the  net  outcome  is 
the  accumulation  of  an  isolated  set  of  words,  a  jargon  or 
scholastic  cant,  and  to  what  extent  the  natural  power  of 
judgment  is  clogged  by  this  accumulation,  there  is  a  reaction 
to  the  opposite  extreme.  Technical  terms  are  banished; 
‘name  words’  exist,  but  not  nouns;  ‘action  words,’  but 


language  and  training  thought  245 

not  verbs;  pupils  may  '  take  away,’  but  not  subtract;  they 
may  tell  what  four  fives  are,  but  not  what  four  times  five 
are,  and  so  on.  A  sound  instinct  underlies  this  reaction  — 
aversion  to  words  that  give  the  pretense,  but  not  the  reality, 
of  meaning.  Yet  the  fundamental  difficulty  is  not  with  the 
word,  but  with  the  idea.  If  the  idea  is  not  grasped,  nothing 
is  gained  by  using  a  more  familiar  word;  if  the  idea  is 
grasped,  the  use  of  the  term  that  exactly  names  it  may  as¬ 
sist  in  fixing  the  idea.  Terms  denoting  highly  exact  mean¬ 
ings  should  be  introduced  only  sparingly  —  that  is,  a  few  at 
a  time;  they  should  be  led  up  to  gradually,  and  great  pains 
should  be  taken  to  secure  the  circumstances  that  render  pre¬ 
cision  of  meaning  significant. 

c.  Forming  Habits  of  Consecutive  Discourse.  As  we  saw, 
language  connects  and  organizes  meanings  as  well  as  selects 
and  fixes  them.  As  every  meaning  is  set  in  the  context  of 
some  situation,  so  every  word  in  concrete  use  belongs  to 
some  sentence  (it  may  itself  represent  a  condensed  sen¬ 
tence)  ;  and  the  sentence,  in  turn,  belongs  to  some  larger 
story,  description,  or  reasoning  process.  It  is  unnecessary 
to  repeat  what  has  been  said  about  the  importance  of  con¬ 
tinuity  and  ordering  of  meanings.  We  may,  however,  note 
some  ways  in  which  school  practices  tend  to  interrupt  con¬ 
secutiveness  of  language  and  thereby  interfere  harmfully 
with  systematic  reflection. 

First,  teachers  have  a  habit  of  monopolizing  continued 
discourse.  Many,  if  not  most,  instructors  would  be  surprised 
if  informed  at  the  end  of  the  day  of  the  amount  of  time  they 
have  talked  as  compared  with  any  pupil.  Children’s  con¬ 
versation  is  often  confined  to  answering  questions  in  brief 
phrases  or  in  single  disconnected  sentences.  Expatiation  and 
explanation  are  reserved  for  the  teacher,  who  often  admits 
any  hint  at  an  answer  on  the  part  of  the  pupil,  and  then 
amplifies  what  he  supposes  the  child  must  have  meant.  The 


HOW  WE  THINK 


246 

habits  of  sporadic  and  fi'agmcntaiy  discourse  thus  promoted 
have  inevitably  a  disintegrating  intellectual  influence. 

Second,  assignment  of  too  short  lessons,  when  accom¬ 
panied  (as  it  usually  is  in  order  to  pass  the  time  of  the  reci¬ 
tation  period)  by  minute  '  analytic  ’  questioning,  has  the 
same  effect.  This  evil  is  usually  at  its  height  in  such  sub¬ 
jects  as  history  and  literature,  where  not  infrequently  the 
material  is  so  minutely  subdivided  as  to  break  up  the  unity 
of  meaning  belonging  to  a  given  portion  of  the  matter,  to 
destroy  perspective,  and  in  effect  to  reduce  the  whole  topic 
to  an  accumulation  of  disconnected  details  all  upon  the  same 
level.  More  often  than  the  teacher  is  aware,  his  mind  carries 
and  supplies  the  background  of  unity  of  meaning  against 
which  pupils  project  isolated  scraps. 

Third,  insistence  upon  avoiding  error  instead  of  attaining 
power  tends  also  to  interruption  of  continuous  discourse  and 
thought.  Children  who  begin  with  something  to  say  and  with 
intellectual  eagerness  to  say  it  are  sometimes  made  so  con¬ 
scious  of  minor  errors  in  substance  and  form  that  the  energy 
that  should  go  into  constructive  thinking  is  diverted  into 
anxiety  not  to  make  mistakes,  and  even,  in  extreme  cases, 
into  passive  quiescence  as  the  best  method  of  minimizing 
error.  This  tendency  is  especially  marked  in  connection  with 
the  writing  of  compositions,  essays,  and  themes.  It  has  even 
been  gravely  recommended  that  little  children  should  al¬ 
ways  write  on  trivial  subjects  and  in  short  sentences  because 
in  that  way  they  are  less  likely  to  make  mistakes.  The 
teaching  of  high-school  and  college  students  occasionally 
reduces  itself  to  a  technique  for  detecting  and  designating 
mistakes.  Self-consciousness  and  constraint  follow.  Students 
lose  zest  for  writing,  Instead  of  being  interested  in  what 
they  have  to  say  and  in  how  it  is  said  as  a  means  of  ade¬ 
quate  formulation  and  expression  of  their  own  thought,  in¬ 
terest  is  drained  off.  Having  to  say  something  is  a  very 
different  matter  from  having  something  to  say. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTEEN 


OBSERVATION  AND  INFORMATION 
IN  THE  TRAINING  OF  MIND 


Thinking  is  ordering  of  subject  matter  with  reference 
to  discovering  what  it  signifies  or  indicates.  Thinking  no 
more  exists  apart  from  this  arranging  of  subject  matter  than 
digestion  occurs  apart  from  the  assimilating  of  food.  The 
way  in  which  the  subj  ect  matter  is  supplied  and  assimilated 
is,  therefore,  of  fundamental  importance,  If  the  subject  mat¬ 
ter  is  provided  in  too  scanty  or  too  profuse  fashion,  if  it 
comes  in  disordered  array  or  in  isolated  scraps,  the  effect 
upon  habits  of  thought  is  detrimental.  If  personal  obser¬ 
vation  and  the  communication  of  information  by  others 
(whether  in  books  or  speech)  are  rightly  conducted,  half 
the  logical  battle  is  won,  for  these  are  the  channels  of  ob¬ 
taining  subject  matter,  and  the  method  in  which  they  are 
carried  on  directly  affects  the  habit  of  thinking.  The  effect 
is  often  deeper  because  it  is  so  unconscious.  The  best  diges¬ 
tion  can  be  ruined  by  innutritious  foodstuffs,  by  eating  at 
the  wrong  time,  too  much  at  a  time,  or  having  an  unbal¬ 
anced  diet  —  that  is,  one  the  materials  of  which  are  badly 
arranged. 

I.  The  Natuee  and  Value  of  Observation 
Observation  Not  an  End  in  Itself 

The  protest,  mentioned  in  the  last  chapter,  of  educational 
reformers  against  the  exaggerated  and  false  use  of  language, 
insisted  upon  personal  and  direct  observation  as  the  altema- 


HOW  WE  THINK 


248 

tive  course.  The  reformers  felt  that  the  current  emphasis 
upon  the  linguistic  factor  eliminated  all  opportunity  for 
first-hand  acquaintance  with  real  things;  hence  they  ap¬ 
pealed  to  sense  perception  to  fill  the  gap.  It  is  not  surprising 
that  this  enthusiastic  zeal  frequently  failed  to  ask  how  and 
why  observation  is  educative,  and  hence  fell  into  the  error 
of  making  observation  an  end  in  itself  and  hence  was  satis¬ 
fied  with  any  kind  of  material  under  any  kind  of  conditions, 
Such  isolation  of  observation  is  still  manifested  in  the  state¬ 
ment  that  this  faculty  develops  first,  then  that  of  memory 
and  imagination,  and  finally  the  faculty  of  thought.  Prom 
this  point  of  view,  observation  is  regarded  as  furnishing 
crude  masses  of  raw  material,  to  which,  later  on,  reflective 
processes  may  be  applied.  Our  previous  pages  should  have 
made  obvious  the  fallacy  of  this  point  of  view  by  bringing 
out  the  fact  that  simple  concrete  thinking  attends  all  our 
intercourse  with  things  that  is  not  on  a  purely  physical  level. 

Observation  Impelled  by  Sympathetic  Interest  in  Extending 
Acquaintance 

All  persons  have  a  natural  desire  —  akin  to  curiosity  — 
for  a  widening  of  their  range  of  acquaintance  with  persons 
and  things.  The  sign  in  art  galleries  that  forbids  the  carry¬ 
ing  of  canes  and  umbrellas  is  obvious  testimony  to  the  fact 
that  simply  to  see  is  not  enough  for  many  people;  there  is 
a  feeling  of  lack  of  acquaintance  until  some  direct  contact 
is  made.  This  demand  for  fuller  and  closer  knowledge  is 
quite  different  from  conscious  interest  in  observation  for  its 
own  sake.  Desire  for  expansion,  for  ‘  self-realization,’  is  its 
motive.  The  interest  is  sympathetic,  socially  and  sesthetically 
sympathetic,  rather  than  cognitive.  While  the  interest  is 
especially  keen  in  children  (because  their  actual  experience  is 
so  small  and  their  possible  experience  so  large) ,  it  still  char¬ 
acterizes  adults  when  routine  has  not  blunted  its  edge.  This 


OBSERVATION  AND  INFORMATION  249 
sympathetic  interest  provides  the  medium  for  carrying  and 
binding  together  what  would  otherwise  be  a  multitude  of 
items,  diverse,  disconnected,  and  of  no  intellectual  use. 
The  result  is  a  social  and  aesthetic  organization  rather  than 
one  consciously  intellectual;  but  it  provides  the  natural  op¬ 
portunity  and  supplies  the  material  for  conscious  intellectual 
explorations.  Some  educators  have  recommended  that  na¬ 
ture  study  in  the  elementary  schools  be  conducted  with  a 
love  of  nature  and  a  cultivation  of  assthetic  appreciation  in 
view  rather  than  in  a  purely  analytic  spirit.  Others  have 
urged  making  much  of  the  care  of  animals  and  plants.  Both 
of  these  important  recommendations  have  grown  out  of  ex¬ 
perience,  not  out  of  theory,  but  they  afford  an  excellent 
exemplification  of  the  point  just  made. 

Analytic  Observation  Impelled  by  Need  Arising  in  Activity: 

Some  Fallacies  about  Sense-Training 

In  normal  development,  specific  analytic  observations  are 
originally  connected  almost  exclusively  with  the  imperative 
need  for  noting  means  and  ends  in  carrying  on  activities, 
When  one  is  doing  something  intelligently,  one  is  compelled, 
if  the  work  is  to  succeed  (unless  it  is  purely  routine) ,  to  use 
eyes,  ears,  and  sense  of  touch  as  guides  to  action.  Without  a 
constant  and  alert  exercise  of  the  senses,  not  even  plays  and 
games  can  go  on;  in  any  form  of  work,  materials,  obstacles, 
appliances,  failures,  and  successes  must  be  intently  watched. 
Sense  perception  does  not  occur  for  its  own  sake  or  for  pur¬ 
poses  of  training,  but  because  it  is  an  indispensable  factor 
of  success  in  doing  what  one  is  trying  to  do.  Although  it  is 
not  designed  for  sense-training,  this  method  effects  sense¬ 
training  in  the  most  economical  and  thoroughgoing  way. 
Various  schemes  have  been  designed  by  teachers  for  culti¬ 
vating  sharp  and  prompt  observation  of  forms,  as  by  writing 
words  (even  in  an  unknown  language),  making  arrange- 


2S0  HOW  WE  THINK 

ments  of  figures  and  geometrical  forms,  and  having  pupils 
reproduce  them  after  a  momentary  glance.  Children  often 
attain  great  skill  in  quick  seeing  and  full  reproducing  of  even 
complicated  meaningless  combinations.  But  such  methods 
of  training,  however  valuable  as  occasional  games  and  di¬ 
versions,  compare  very  unfavorably  with  the  training  of  eye 
and  hand  that  comes  as  an  incident  of  work  with  tools  in 
wood  or  metals,  or  such  activities  as  gardening,  cooking,  or 
the  care  of  animals.  Training  by  isolated  exercises  leaves  no 
deposit,  leads  nowhere;  and  even  the  technical  skill  acquired 
has  little  radiating  power  or  transferable  value,  Criticisms 
made  upon  the  training  of  observation,  on  the  ground  that 
many  persons  cannot  correctly  reproduce  the  forms  and  ar¬ 
rangement  of  the  figures  on  the  face  of  their  watches,  misses 
the  point,  because  pei’sons  do  not  look  at  a  watch  to  find  out 
whether  four  o’clock  is  indicated  by  IIII  or  by  IV,  but  to 
find  out  what  time  it  is,  and  if  observation  decides  this  fact, 
noting  other  details  is  irrelevant  and  a  waste  of  time.  In  the 
training  of  observation  the  question  of  purpose  and  result 
is  all-important. 

Observation  Impelled  by  Solving  Theoretical  Problems 

The  further  intellectual  or  scientific  development  of  ob¬ 
servation  follows  the  line  of  the  growth  of  practical  into 
theoretical  reflection  already  traced.^  As  problems  emerge 
and  are  dwelt  upon,  observation  is  directed  less  to  facts 
that  bear  upon  a  practical  aim  and  more  to  what  bears 
upon  a  problem  as  a  problem.  What  often  makes  observation 
in  schools  intellectually  ineffective  is  (more  than  anything 
else)  that  it  is  carried  on  without  a  sense  of  a  problem  that 
it  helps  define  and  solve.  The  evil  of  this  isolation  is  seen 
through  the  entire  educational  system,  from  the  kindergar¬ 
ten  through  the  elementary  and  high  schools  to  the  college. 

^  See  page  94. 


OBSERVATION  AND  INFORMATION  251 

Almost  everywhere  may  be  found,  at  some  time,  recourse 
to  observations  as  if  they  were  of  complete  and  final  value 
in  themselves,  instead  of  being  means  for  getting  the  data 
that  test  an  idea  or  plan  and  that  make  the  felt  difficulty 
into  a  question  that  guides  subsequent  thinking,^  Moreover, 
intellectual  method  is  violated  because  observations  are  not 
aroused  and  guided  by  any  idea  of  the  ‘purpose  they  are  to 
serve. 

In  the  kindergarten  observations  are  heaped  up  regarding 
geometrical  forma,  lines,  surfaces,  cubes,  colors,  and  so  on. 
In  the  elementary  school,  under  the  name  of '  object-lessons,’ 
the  form  and  properties  of  objects  —  apple,  orange,  chalk  — 
selected  almost  at  random  are  minutely  noted,  while  under 
the  name  of '  nature  study  ’  similar  observations  are  directed 
upon  leaves,  stones,  insects,  selected  in  almost  equally  arbi¬ 
trary  fashion.  In  the  high  school  and  college,  laboratory  and 
microscopic  observations  are  carried  on  as  if  the  accumula¬ 
tion  of  observed  facta  and  the  acquisition  of  skill  in  manipu¬ 
lation  were  educational  ends  in  themselves. 

Observation  in  Scientific  Work 

Compare  with  these  methods  of  isolated  observations  the 
statement  of  Jevons  that  observation  as  conducted  by  scien¬ 
tific  men  is  effective  “  only  when  excited  and  guided  by  hope 
of  verifying  a  theory  ” ;  and  again,  “  the  number  of  things 
which  can  be  observed  and  experimented  upon  are  infinite, 
and  if  we  merely  set  to  work  to  record  facts  without  any  dis¬ 
tinct  purpose,  our  records  will  have  no  value.”  Strictly 
speaking,  the  first  statement  of  Jevons  is  too  narrow.  Scien¬ 
tific  men  institute  observations  not  merely  to  test  an  idea 
(or  suggested  explanatory  meaning),  but  also  to  locate  a 
problem  or  even  create  one  and  thereby  guide  the  formation 
of  a  hypothesis.  But  the  principle  of  his  remark  —  namely, 
2  See  page  108. 


262  HOW  WE  THINK 

that  scientific  men  never  make  the  accumulation  of  ob¬ 
servations  an  end  in  itself,  but  always  a  means  to  a  general 
intellectual  conclusion  —  is  absolutely  sound.  Until  the 
force  of  this  principle  is  adequately  recognized  in  education, 
observation  will  be  largely  a  matter  of  uninteresting  dead 
work  or  of  acquiring  forms  of  technical  skill  that  are  not 
available  as  intellectual  resourses. 


II.  Methods  and  Materials  op  Observation 
IN  THE  Schools 

The  best  methods  already  in  use  in  schools  furnish  many 
suggestions  for  giving  observation  its  right  place  in  mental 
training.  Three  features  of  these  methods  deserve  mention. 

Observation  Should  Involve  Active  Exploration 

First,  they  rest  upon  the  sound  assumption  that  observa¬ 
tion  is  an  active  process,  Observation  is  exploration,  inquiry 
for  the  sake  of  discovering  something  previously  hidden  and 
unknown,  this  something  being  needed  in  order  to  reach 
some  end,  practical  or  theoretical,  Observation  is  to  be  dis¬ 
criminated  from  recognition,  the  perception  of  what  is  fa¬ 
miliar.  The  identification  of  something  already  understood 
is,  indeed,  an  indispensable  function  of  further  investiga¬ 
tion  ;  but  it  is  relatively  automatic  and  passive,  while  ob¬ 
servation  demands  the  mind  to  be  alert,  on  the  qui  vive, 
searching  and  probing.  Recognition  deals  with  the  already 
mastered;  observation  is  concerned  with  delving  into  the  un¬ 
known.  The  common  notions  that  perception  is  like  writing 
on  a  blank  piece  of  paper  or  like  impressing  an  image  on  the 
mind  as  a  seal  is  imprinted  on  wax  or  as  a  picture  is  formed 
on  a  photographic  plate  (notions  that  have  played  a  disaa- 


“  See  page  133. 


OBSERVATION  AND  INFORMATION  263 
trous  role  in  educational  methods)  arise  from  a  failure  to 
distinguish  between  automatic  recognition  and  live  ob¬ 
servation. 

Observation  Should  Introduce  the  Dramatic  Element  of  Sus¬ 
pense,  of  ‘  Plot  Interest  ’ 

Second,  much  assistance  in  the  selection  of  appropriate 
material  for  observation  may  be  derived  from  considering 
the  eagerness  and  closeness  of  observation  that  attend  the 
following  of  a  story  or  drama.  Alertness  of  observation  is  at 
its  height  wherever  there  is '  plot  interest.’  Why?  Because  of 
the  balanced  combination  of  the  old  and  the  new,  of  the  fa¬ 
miliar  and  the  unexpected.  We  hang  on  the  lips  of  the  story¬ 
teller  because  of  the  element  of  mental  suspense.  Alterna¬ 
tives  are  suggested,  but  are  left  ambiguous,  so  that  our  whole 
being  questions:  What  befell  next?  Which  way  did  things 
turn  out?  Contrast  the  ease  and  fullness  with  which  a  child 
notes  all  the  salient  traits  of  a  story,  with  the  labor  and  in¬ 
adequacy  of  his  observation  of  some  dead  and  static  thing 
where  nothing  raises  a  question  or  suggests  alternative 
outcomea. 

Wlien  an  individual  is  engaged  in  doing  or  making  some¬ 
thing  (the  activity  not  being  of  such  a  mechanical  and 
habitual  character  that  its  outcome  is  assured) ,  there  is  an 
analogous  situation.  Something  is  going  to  come  of  what 
is  present  to  the  sense,  but  just  what  is  doubtful.  The  plot  is 
unfolding  toward  success  or  failure,  but  just  when  or  how  is 
uncertain.  Hence  the  keen  and  tense  observation  of  condi¬ 
tions  and  results  that  attends  constructive  manual  opera¬ 
tions.  Where  the  subject  matter  is  of  a  more  impersonal  sort, 
the  same  principle  of  movement  toward  a  denouement  may 
apply.  It  is  a  commonplace  that  what  is  moving  attracts 
notice  when  that  which  is  at  rest  escapes  it.  Yet  too  often  it 
would  seem  as  if  pains  were  taken  to  deprive  the  material 


HOW  WE  THINK 


254 

of  school  observations  of  all  life  and  dramatic  quality,  to 
reduce  it  to  a  dead  and  inert  form.  Mere  change  is  not 
enough,  however,  Vicissitude,  alteration,  motion,  excite  ob¬ 
servation;  but  if  they  merely  excite  it,  there  is  no  thought. 
The  changes  must  (like  the  incidents  of  a  well-arranged 
story  or  plot)  take  place  in  a  certain  cumulative  order ;  each 
successive  change  must  at  once  remind  us  of  its  predecessor 
and  arouse  interest  in  its  successor  if  observations  of  change 
arc  to  be  intellectually  ordered  and  thus  are  to  aid  in  form¬ 
ing  a  logical  attitude. 

Observation  of  Structure  and  Function.  Living  beings, 
plants  and  animals,  fulfill  the  twofold  requirement  to  an 
extraordinary  degree.  Where  there  is  growth,  there  is  mo¬ 
tion,  change,  process;  and  there  is  also  arrangement  of  the 
changes  in  a  cycle,  The  first  arouses  thought;  the  sec¬ 
ond  organizes  it,  Much  of  the  extraordinary  interest  that 
children  take  in  planting  seeds  and  watching  the  stages  of 
their  growth  is  due  to  the  fact  that  a  drama  is  enacting  be¬ 
fore  their  eyes ;  there  is  something  doing,  each  step  of  which 
is  important  in  the  destiny  of  the  plant.  The  great  practical 
improvements  that  have  occurred  of  late  years  in  the  teach¬ 
ing  of  botany  and  zoology  will  be  found,  upon  inspection,  to 
involve  treating  plants  and  animals  as  beings  that  act,  that 
do  something,  instead  of  as  mere  inert  specimens  having 
static  properties  to  be  inventoried,  named,  and  registered. 
Treated  in  the  latter  fashion,  observation  is  inevitably  re¬ 
duced  to  the  falsely  '  analytic,’  *  to  mere  enumeration  and 
cataloguing. 

There  is,  of  course,  a  place,  and  an  important  place,  for 
observation  of  the  static  qualities  of  objects.  When,  how¬ 
ever,  the  primary  interest  is  in  function,  in  what  the  object 
does  and  how  it  operates,  there  is  a  motive  for  more  minute 
analytic  study,  for  observation  of  structure.  Interest  in  not- 
*  Sae  page  127, 


OBSERVATION  AND  INFORMATION  255 

ing  an  activity  passes  insensibly  into  noting  how  the  activity 
is  carried  on;  the  interest  in  what  is  done  passes  over  into 
an  interest  in  the  organs  by  which  it  is  done.  But  when  the 
beginning  is  made  with  the  morphological,  the  anatomical, 
the  noting  of  peculiarities  of  form,  size,  color,  and  distribu¬ 
tion  of  parts,  the  material  is  cut  off  from  significance  and  be¬ 
comes  dead  and  dull.  It  is  as  natural  for  children  to  look 
intently  for  the  stomata  of  a  plant  after  they  have  learned 
that,  like  animals,  it  breathes,  and  so  must  have  something 
corresponding  in  function  to  lungs.  It  is  repulsive  to  attend 
minutely  to  them  when  they  are  presented  for  study  as  mere 
items  of  structure,  and  no  idea  of  their  action  and  use  is 
conveyed. 

Observation  Should  Become  Scientific  in  Nature 

Third,  observation  that  is  carried  on  at  first  to  help  out 
a  practical  purpose  or  for  the  mere  fun  of  seeing  and  hear¬ 
ing  comes  to  be  conducted  for  an  intellectual  purpose. 
Pupils  learn  to  observe  for  the  sake  (a)  of  finding  out 
what  sort  of  perplexity  confronts  them;  (b)  of  conjec¬ 
turing  and  inventing  hypothetical  explanations  for  the  puz¬ 
zling  features  revealed  by  observation;  and  (c)  of  testing 
the  ideas  thus  suggested. 

In  short,  observation  becomes  scientific  in  nature.  Of  such 
observations  it  may  be  said  that  they  should  follow  a 
rhythm  between  the  extensive  and  the  intensive.  Problems 
become  definite,  and  suggested  explanations  significant  by  an 
alternation  between  a  wide  and  loose  soaking  in  of  relevant 
facts  and  a  minutely  accurate  study  of  a  few  selected  facts. 
The  wider,  less  exact  observation  is  necessary  to  give  the 
student  a  feeling  for  the  reality  of  the  field  of  inquiiy,  a 
sense  of  its  bearings  and  possibilities,  and  to  store  his  mind 
with  materials  that  imagination  may  transform  into  sugges¬ 
tions.  The  intensive  study  is  necessary  for  limiting  the  prob- 


256  HOW  WE  THINK 

lem  and  for  securing  the  conditions  of  experimental  testing, 
As  the  latter  by  itself  is  too  specialized  and  technical  to 
arouse  intellectual  growth,  the  former  by  itself  is  too  super¬ 
ficial  and  scattering  for  control  of  intellectual  development, 
In  the  sciences  of  life,  field  study,  excursions,  acquaintance 
with  living  things  in  their  natural  habitats,  may  alternate 
with  microscopic  and  laboratory  observation.  In  the  physi¬ 
cal  sciences,  phenomena  of  light,  of  heat,  of  electricity,  of 
moisture,  of  gravity,  in  their  broad  setting  in  nature  —  their 
physiographic  setting  —  should  prepare  for  an  exact  study 
of  selected  facts  under  conditions  of  laboratory  control.  In 
this  way,  the  student  gets  the  benefit  of  technical  scientific 
methods  of  discovery  and  testing,  while  he  retains  his  sense 
of  the  identity  of  the  laboratory  modes  of  energy  with  large 
out-of-door  realities,  thereby  avoiding  the  impression  (that 
so  often  accrues)  that  the  facts  studied  are  peculiar  to  the 
laboratory.  Scientific  observation  does  not,  however,  merely 
replace  observation  that  is  enjoyed  for  its  own  sake.  The 
latter,  sharpened  by  the  purpose  of  contributing  to  an 
art  like  writing,  painting,  singing,  becomes  truly  esthetic, 
and  the  persons  who  enjoy  seeing  and  hearing  will  be  the 
best  observers, 

III,  Communication  of  Information 

When  all  is  said  and  done,  the  field  of  fact  open  to  any 
one  observer  by  himself  is  narrow.  Into  every  one  of  our 
beliefs,  even  those  that  we  have  worked  out  under  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  utmost  personal,  first-hand  acquaintance,  much  has 
insensibly  entered  from  what  we  have  heard  or  read  of  the 
observations  and  conclusions  of  others.  In  spite  of  the  great 
extension  of  direct  observation  in  our  schools,  the  vast  bulk 
of  educational  subject  matter  is  derived  from  other  sources 
■ — from  textbook,  lecture,  and  viva  voce  interchange.  No 


OBSERVATION  AND  INFORMATION  257 

educational  question  ia  of  greater  import  than  how  to  get 
intellectual  good  out  of  what  persona  and  books  have  to 
communicate. 

How  to  Make  an  Intellectual  Asset  of  Learning  through  Com¬ 
municated  Information 

Doubtless  the  chief  meaning  associated  with  the  word 
instruction  is  this  conveying  and  instilling  of  the  results  of 
the  observations  and  inferences  of  others.  Doubtless  the  un¬ 
due  prominence  in  education  of  the  ideal  of  amassing  in¬ 
formation  “  has  its  source  in  the  prominence  of  the  learning 
of  other  persons.  The  problem,  then,  is  how  to  convert  this 
form  of  learning  into  an  intellectual  asset.  In  logical  terms, 
the  material  supplied  from  the  experience  of  others  is  testi¬ 
mony:  that  is  to  say,  evidence  submitted  by  others  that 
ia  to  be  employed  by  one’s  own  judgment  in  reaching 
a  conclusion.  How  shall  we  treat  subject  matter  that  is  sup¬ 
plied  by  textbook  and  teacher  so  that  it  shall  rank  as  mate¬ 
rial  of  reflective  inquiry,  not  as  ready-made  intellectual 
pabulum  to  be  accepted  and  swallowed  just  as  if  it  were 
something  bought  at  a  shop? 

In  reply  to  this  question,  we  may  say  first,  that  com¬ 
munication  of  material  should  be  needed.  That  is  to  say,  it 
should  be  such  as  cannot  readily  be  attained  by  personal  ob¬ 
servation.  For  teacher  or  book  to  cram  pupils  with  facts 
which,  with  little  more  trouble,  they  could  discover  by  direct 
inquiry  is  to  violate  their  intellectual  integrity  and  to  culti¬ 
vate  mental  servility.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  material 
supplied  through  communication  of  others  should  be  meager 
or  scanty.  With  the  utmost  range  of  the  senses,  the  world  of 
nature  and  history  stretches  out  almost  infinitely  beyond. 
But  fields  within  which  direct  observation  is  practicable 
should  be  carefully  chosen  and  sacredly  protected.  Curiosity 
IS  See  page  64. 


HOW  WE  THINK 


258 

should  not  be  dulled  by  making  its  satisfaction  cheap  and 
stale. 

Second,  material  should  be  supplied  by  way  of  stimulus, 
not  with  dogmatic  finality  and  rigidity.  When  pupils  get  the 
notion  that  any  field  of  study  has  been  definitely  surveyed, 
that  knowledge  about  it  is  exhaustive  and  final,  they  may 
become  docile  pupils,  but  they  cease  to  be  students.  All 
thinking  whatsoever  —  so  be  it  is  thinking  —  contains  a 
phase  of  originality.  This  originality  does  not  imply  that 
the  student’s  conclusion  varies  from  the  conclusions  of 
others,  much  less  that  it  is  a  radically  novel  conclusion.  His 
originality  is  not  incompatible  with  large  use  of  materials 
and  suggestions  contributed  by  others.  Originality  means 
personal  interest  in  the  question,  personal  initiative  in  turn¬ 
ing  over  the  suggestions  furnished  by  others,  and  sincerity 
in  following  them  out  to  a  tested  conclusion.  Literally,  the 
phrase  '  Think  for  yourself  ’  is  tautological ;  any  thinking 
is  thinking  for  one's  self. 

Third,  the  material  furnished  by  way  of  information 
should  be  relevant  to  a  question  that  is  vital  in  the  student’s 
own  experience.  What  has  been  said  about  the  evil  of  obser¬ 
vations  that  begin  and  end  in  themselves  may  be  transferred 
without  change  to  communicated  learning.  Instruction  in 
subject  matter  that  does  not  fit  into  an  interest  already 
stirring  in  the  student’s  own  experience  or  that  is  not  pre¬ 
sented  in  such  a  way  as  to  arouse  a  problem  is  worse  than 
useless  for  intellectual  purposes.  In  that  it  fails  to  enter  into 
any  process  of  reflection,  it  is  useless ;  in  that  it  remains  in 
the  mind  as  so  much  lumber  and  dSbris,  it  is  a  barrier,  an 
obstruction  in  the  way  of  effective  thinking  when  a  problem 
arises, 

Another  way  of  stating  the  same  principle  is  that  material 
furnished  by  communication  must  be  such  as  to  enter  into 
some  existing  system  or  organization  of  experience.  All  stu- 


OBSERVATION  AND  INFORMATION  259 

denta  of  paychology  are  familiar  with  the  principle  of  apper¬ 
ception  —  that  we  aaaimilate  new  material  with  what  we 
have  digested  and  retained  from  prior  experiences.  Now  the 
apperceptive  basis  of  material  furnished  by  teacher  and 
textbook  should  be  found,  as  far  as  possible,  in  what  the 
learner  has  derived  from  more  direct  forms  of  his  own  expe¬ 
rience.  There  is  a  tendency  to  connect  material  of  the  school¬ 
room  simply  with  the  material  of  prior  school  lessons,  instead 
of  linking  it  to  what  the  pupil  has  acquired  in  his  out-of- 
school  experience.  The  teacher  says,  “  Do  you  not  remember 
what  we  learned  from  the  book  last  week?  ”  —  instead  of 
saying,  "  Do  you  not  recall  such  and  such  a  thing  that  you 
have  seen  or  heard?  ”  As  a  result,  there  are  built  up  detached 
and  independent  systems  of  school  knowledge  that  inertly 
overlay  the  ordinary  systems  of  experience  instead  of  react¬ 
ing  to  enlarge  and  refine  them.  Pupils  are  taught  to  live  in 
two  separate  worlds,  one  the  world  of  out-of-school  experi¬ 
ence,  the  other  the  world  of  books  and  lessons.  Then  we 
stupidly  wonder  why  what  is  studied  in  school  counts  so 
little  outside. 


OHAPTEB  EIGHTEEN 


THE  RECITATION  AND  THE 
TRAINING  OF  THOUGHT 


I.  False  Ideas  about  the  Recitation 

In  the  recitation  the  teacher  comes  into  hia  closest  con¬ 
tact  with  the  pupil.  In  the  recitation  focus  the  possibilities 
of  guiding  children’s  activities,  arousing  eagerness  for  infor¬ 
mation,  influencing  language  habits,  and  directing  observa¬ 
tions.  In  discussing  the  significance  of  the  recitation  as  an 
instrumentality  of  education,  we  are  accordingly  bringing 
to  a  head  the  points  considered  in  the  last  three  chapters, 
rather  than  introducing  a  new  topic.  The  method  in  which 
the  recitation  is  carried  on  is  a  crucial  test  of  a  teacher's 
ability  to  diagnose  the  intellectual  state  of  his  pupils  and  to 
supply  the  conditions  that  will  arouse  intellectual  responses: 
a  crucial  test,  in  short,  of  his  art  as  a  teacher. 

Re-Citing  versus  Reflecting 

The  use  of  the  word  ‘  recitation  '  to  designate  the  period  of 
the  most  intimate  intellectual  contact  of  teacher  with  pupil 
and  of  pupil  with  pupil  is  a  fateful  fact.  To  re-cite  is  to  cite 
again,  to  repeat,  to  tell  over  and  over.  If  we  were  to  call  this 
period  ‘  reiteration,’  the  name  would  hardly  bring  out  more 
clearly  than  does  the  word  ‘  recitation  '  the  frequent  domi¬ 
nation  of  instruction  by  rehearsal  of  secondhand  informa¬ 
tion,  and  of  memorizing  for  the  sake  of  producing  correct 
replies  at  the  proper  time.  Everything  which  is  said  in  this 
chapter  is  insignificant  in  comparison  with  the  basic  truth 


RECITATION  AND  TRAINING  THOUGHT  261 
that  the  recitatioa  is  the  place  and  time  for  stimulating  and 
directing  reflection.  Reproduction  of  memorized  matter  is 
only  an  incident  —  even  though  an  indispensable  incident 
—  in  the  business  of  cultivating  a  thoughtful  attitude. 

The  recitation  exhibits,  more  definitely  than  anything  else 
in  the  school  system,  the  domination  of  the  ideal  of  amassing 
information  Tvithout  a  purpose  for  it,  because  information 
would  help  master  a  difficulty,  and  without  judgment  in  se¬ 
lection  of  what  is  pertinent.  It  is  hardly  an  exaggeration  to 
say  that  too  often  the  pupil  is  treated  as  if  he  were  a  phono¬ 
graphic  record  on  which  is  impressed  a  set  of  words  that  are 
to  be  literally  reproduced  when  the  recitation  or  examina¬ 
tion  presses  the  proper  lever.  Or,  varying  the  metaphor,  the 
mind  of  the  pupil  is  treated  as  if  it  were  a  cistern  into  which 
information  is  conducted  by  one  set  of  pipes  that  mechani¬ 
cally  pour  it  in,  while  the  recitation  is  the  pump  that  brings 
out  the  material  again  through  another  set  of  pipes.  Then 
the  skill  of  the  teacher  is  rated  by  his  or  her  ability  in  man¬ 
aging  the  two  pipe-lines  of  flow  inward  and  outward. 

The  Evils  of  Passivity 

It  does  not  need  to  be  mentioned  that  this  practice  puts  a 
premium  on  passivity  of  mind.  Everything  which  has  been 
said  in  the  discussion  of  thinking  has  emphasized  that  pas¬ 
sivity  is  the  opposite  of  thought;  that  it  is  not  only  a  sign 
of  failure  to  call  out  judgment  and  personal  understanding, 
but  that  it  also  dulls  curiosity,  generates  mind-wandering, 
and  causes  learning  to  be  a  task  instead  of  a  delight.  It  does 
not  in  most  cases  even  serve  the  purpose  of  storing  the  mind 
with  a  subject  matter  of  facts  and  principles  that  are  avail¬ 
able  when  they  are  needed.  The  mind  is  not  a  piece  of  blot¬ 
ting  paper  that  absorbs  and  retains  automatically.  It  is 
rather  a  living  organism  that  has  to  search  for  its  food,  that 
selects  and  rejects  according  to  its  present  conditions  and 


262  HOW  WE  THINK 

needs,  and  that  retains  only  what  it  digests  and  transmutes 
into  part  of  the  energy  of  its  own  being. 


11.  The  Functions  of  the  Recitation 

What  are  the  objects  that  the  recitation  should  achieve? 
In  general,  they  are  these  three:  (1)  It  should  stimulate  in¬ 
tellectual  eagerness,  awaken  an  intensified  desire  for  in¬ 
telligent  activity  and  knowledge,  and  love  of  study  —  atti¬ 
tudes  that  are  essentially  emotional  in  character.  (2)  In 
case  pupils  bring  these  interests  and  affections  with  them 
and  in  the  degree  in  which  they  are  aroused,  the  recitation 
should  guide  them  into  those  channels  in  which  they  can 
accomplish  intellectual  work,  just  as  the  great  potential 
force  of  a  river  has  to  be  directed  into  a  particular  course 
in  order  to  grind  grain  or  to  convert  water  power  into  elec¬ 
tric  energy.  (3)  It  should  assist  in  organizing  what  has  been 
acquired,  so  as  to  test  its  quality  and  quantity,  and  test 
especially  the  existing  attitudes  and  habits  with  a  view  to 
ensuring  their  greater  efficiency  in  the  future. 

These  three  functions,  or  objects,  of  the  recitation  are 
worth  more  extended  consideration. 

The  Recitation  Should  Stimulate  Intellectual  Eagerness 

The  ultimate  impetus  to  study,  to  intellectual  activity 
comes  from  within.  Mentally  as  well  as  physically  there 
must  be  an  appetite.  For  there  is  intellectual  as  well  as 
bodily  hunger  and  thirst.  Yet  the  food  stuffs  of  the  environ¬ 
ment,  either  those  directly  at  hand  or  those  found  by  search, 
finally  determine  what  is  eaten.  That  is,  they  decide  what 
direction  the  appetite  actually  takes.  So  stimulus  from  with¬ 
out,  especially  that  which  occurs  in  a  social  situation,  de¬ 
cides  the  further  movement  of  an  intellectual  impetus.  An 


recitation  and  training  thought  263 

infant  has  to  have  an  impetus  from  within  in  order  to  learn 
to  talk;  it  babbles,  gestures,  etc.  These  at  first  are  formless 
and  diffuse  movements.  Contact  with  others  stimulates  them 
to  take  on  meaning,  intellectual  import. 

A  recitation  should  be  a  situation  in  which  a  class,  a  group 
organized  as  a  social  unity,  with  common  interests,  led  by 
a  more  mature  and  experienced  person,  encourages  mental 
eagerness.  A  pupil  may  come  to  the  class  intellectually 
empty  and  lethargic.  Or  his  intellectual  interests  may  be 
remote  from  the  subject  at  hand.  It  is  the  business  of  the 
recitation  period  to  stir  up  the  mind,  to  get  it  going,  as  it 
were,  to  impart  by  contagion  some  degree  of  intellectual 
excitement.  The  statement  is  sometimes  made  that  there 
have  been  teachers  with  no  training  in  the  theory  of  teach¬ 
ing,  no  scientific  knowledge  of  psychology,  etc.,  who  never¬ 
theless  were  great  teachers,  some  of  them  much  greater 
teachers  than  those  who  have  had  a  full  equipment  of  peda¬ 
gogical  courses.  If  the  reader  will  go  back  over  his  own 
school  experience,  he  will  probably  have  no  trouble  in  dis¬ 
covering  the  why  and  wherefore  of  this  fact.  He  will  note 
that  the  teachers  who  left  the  most  enduring  impression 
were  those  who  awakened  in  him  a  new  intellectual  interest, 
who  communicated  to  him  some  of  their  own  enthusiasm  for 
a  field  of  knowledge  or  art,  who  gave  his  desire  to  inquh'e 
and  find  out  a  momentum  of  its  own.  This  is  the  one  thing 
moat  needful.  Given  this  hunger,  the  mind  will  go  on; 
while  it  may  be  stuffed  to  overflowing  with  information, 
if  this  one  thing  is  omitted,  little  will  be  gained  in  the 
future. 

The  conditions  to  be  met  in  communicating  ardor  in  study 
have  been  indicated  in  various  places  in  prior  discussions. 
The  teacher  must  have  a  genuine  interest  in  mental  activity 
on  his  own  account,  a  love  of  knowledge  that  unconsciously 
animates  his  teaching.  A  bored,  perfunctoi’y  instructor  will 


HOW  WE  THINK 


264 

deaden  any  subject.  Again,  textbooks  must  be  used  as  means 
and  tools,  not  as  ends.  They  are  useful  to  arouse  questions 
and  to  supply  information  with  which  to  answer  them.  But 
when  they  are  permitted  to  dictate  or  even  dominate  the 
conduct  of  the  recitation,  the  result  is  a  dulling  of  thought. 
As  a  rule,  the  material  of  the  text  should  be  attacked  in¬ 
directly,  by  a  flank  movement.  It  is  the  literal  approach  that 
confines  the  mind  to  the  paths  already  trodden  in  the  book. 
But  such  prerequisites  as  these  sum  themselves  up  in  the 
fact  that  a  lively  give-and-take  of  ideas,  experiences,  in¬ 
formation,  between  the  members  of  the  class  should  be  the 
chief  reliance. 

A  vital  discussion  will  make  the  underlying  problems 
stand  out  in  sharply  defined  focus.  Instead  of  treating  all 
facta  and  statements  as  on  the  same  intellectual  level,  thus 
destroying  intellectual  perspective,  and  hence  giving  no  op¬ 
portunity  for  judgment  to  appraise  what  is  important  and 
what  secondary,  the  discussion  should  be  conducted  so  as  to 
center  thought  on  a  few  main  points  around  which  other 
considerations  will  be  organized.  It  will  lead  the  student  to 
turn  back  and  go  over  what  he  has  learned  from  his  prior 
personal  experiences  and  what  he  has  learned  from  others 
(to  reflect) ,  so  as  to  find  out  what  bears,  both  positively  and 
negatively,  on  the  subject  in  hand.  Although  discussion  will 
not  be  allowed  to  degenerate  into  mere  '  argufying,'  a  lively 
discussion  will  bring  out  intellectual  differences  and  op¬ 
posed  points  of  view  and  interpretations,  so  as  to  help  define 
the  true  nature  of  the  problem.  Humor  is  always  in  place, 
as  well  as  sympathy  for  the  pupil  struggling  with  an  idea 
that  he  has  difficulty  in  laying  hold  of. 

The  Recitation  Should  Guide  Pupils  to  Good  Habits  of  Study 

Since  stimulation  and  direction  should  occur  simultane¬ 
ously,  we  have  touched  upon  this  function  in  what  has  just 


RECITATION  AND  TRAINING  THOUGHT  265 

been  said.  From  the  standpoint  of  direction,  the  point  to  be 
emphasized  is  that  the  recitation  cuJminate,  from  the  intel¬ 
lectual  standpoint,  in  the  promotion  of  good  habits  of  study. 
Instead  of  repeating,  we  shall,  then,  say  something  about 
study. 

In  substance,  study  is  simply  reflective  activity  with  es¬ 
pecial  emphasis  on  matter  provided  through  language,  oral 
or  printed.  The  expression  ‘  a  studious  person  ’  suggests  a 
person  who  is  fond  of  books  that  have  a  substantial  mental 
content.  At  the  same  time,  as  the  colloquial  phrase  '  study¬ 
ing  something  out  ‘  suggests,  one  ‘  studies  ’  machinery, 
financial  and  political  situations,  questions  of  personal  con¬ 
duct  and  character.  A  person’s  automobile  will  not  run;  he 
'  studies  out’  the  trouble;  he  puzzles  over  it  to  locate  the 
cause  of  the  trouble.  It  is  obvious  that  this  active  process 
of  search,  ending  in  understanding,  is  very  different  from 
repeating  over  and  over  the  statements  of  a  book  or  lecture 
notes  in  order  to  impress  them  firmly  on  memory  with  a 
view  to  recalling  them  later  on  demand. 

Thinking  is  inquiry,  investigation,  turning  over,  probing 
or  delving  into,  so  as  to  find  something  new  or  to  see  what 
is  already  known  in  a  different  light.  In  short,  it  is  question¬ 
ing.  A  well  established  feature  of  the  traditional  recitation 
is  the  asking  of  questions  by  the  teacher.  But  too  often  they 
are  asked  merely  to  get  an  answer,  not  to  raise  a  question 
for  discussion  by  teacher  and  students  in  common.  The  fact 
is  that  the  separation  usually  made  between  a  preparatory 
'  study  '  period,  when  pupils  con  their  lessons,  and  a  recita¬ 
tion  period,  when  they  exhibit  the  results  of  their  previous 
study,  is  thoroughly  harmful.  Students  need  direction  in 
their  studying.  Hence  some  so-called  ‘  recitation  ’  periods 
should  be  times  of  supervised  study,  when  the  teacher  learns 
the  difficulties  that  students  are  meeting,  ascertains  what 
methods  of  learning  they  use,  gives  hints  and  suggestions, 


HOW  WE  THINK 


266 

helps  a  student  recognize  some  bad  habit  that  is  holding  him 
back.  In  all  cases,  the  recitation  should  be  a  continuation  of 
the  study  period,  following  up  what  has  been  done  and  lead¬ 
ing  on  to  further  independent  study. 

The  Art  of  Questioning.  The  art  of  eondueting  a  recita¬ 
tion  is,  then,  very  largely  the  art  of  questioning  pupils  so 
as  to  direct  their  own  inquiries  and  so  as  to  form  in  them  the 
independent  habit  of  inquiry  in  both  of  its  directions; 
namely,  inquiry  in  observation  and  recollection  for  the  sub¬ 
ject  matter  that  is  pertinent  and  inquiry  through  reasoning 
into  the  meaning  of  material  that  is  present.  The  art  of  ques¬ 
tioning  is  so  fully  the  art  of  guiding  learning  that  hard  and 
fast  rules  cannot  be  laid  down  for  its  exercise.  Some  sugges¬ 
tions  follow. 

First,  in  reference  to  material  already  learned,  questions 
should  require  the  student  to  lise  it  in  dealing  with  a  new 
problem  rather  than  to  reproduce  it  literally  and  directly. 
For  the  former  operation  demands  the  exercise  of  judgment 
by  the  pupil  and  cultivates  originality  even  in  dealing  with 
things  already  well  known  by  others.  Students  in  an  ad¬ 
vanced  class  who  had  been  studying  the  snake,  including 
its  dissection,  were  asked  in  a  written  test:  How  does  the 
snake  move  along  the  ground?  They  were  already  informed 
about  the  muscular  system  and  skeleton;  the  question  com¬ 
pelled  them  to  use  that  information,  to  imagine  the  structure 
of  the  snake  actually  operating,  to  see  in  thought  the 
muscles  in  action.  There  are  times,  however,  when  questions 
asking  for  direct  reproduction  of  material  are  in  place.  When 
a  problem  is  already  under  active  consideration,  and  a  stu¬ 
dent  is  blundering  around  aimlessly,  he  may  be  checked 
and  called  back  to  the  topic  by  being  asked  to  state  as  pre¬ 
cisely  as  possible  just  the  facts  and  principle  that  bear 
upon  it. 

Second,  questions  should  direct  the  mind  of  students  to 


EECITATION  AND  TBAINING  THOUGHT  267 
subject  matter  rather  than  to  the  teacher’s  aim.  This  prin¬ 
ciple  is  violated  when  emphasis  falls  chiefly  on  getting  the 
correct  answer.’-  Then  the  recitation  tends  to  become  a  guess¬ 
ing  bee  as  to  what  the  teacher  is  really  after. 

Third,  questions  should  be  such  as  keep  the  subject  devel¬ 
oping.  That  is,  they  should  be  factors  in  a  continuous  discus¬ 
sion,  not  asked  as  if  each  one  were  complete  in  itself  so  that 
when  that  que.etion  is  answered  that  particular  matter  is 
disposed  of  and  another  topic  can  be  taken  up.  The  failure 
to  get  a  situation  before  the  thought  of  students,  and  a  situa¬ 
tion  that  is  large,  inclusive,  enough  to  have  a  movement 
within  it  from  one  point  to  another  in  a  consecutive  way,’’ 
breaks  the  continuity  of  ideas  and  renders  thought  choppy 
and  disorderly. 

Fourth,  questions  should  periodically  require  a  survey 
and  review  of  what  has  been  gone  over,  in  order  to  extract 
its  net  meaning,  to  gather  up  and  hold  on  to  what  is  signifi¬ 
cant  in  the  prior  discussion  and  to  make  it  stand  out  from 
side  issues,  from  tentative  and  explorative  remarks,  etc. 
The  recitation  should  usually  include  two  or  three  minor 
organizing  surveys  in  order  to  keep  discussion  to  a  point 
and  prevent  its  rambling  on  aimlessly,  '  wandering  all  over 
the  lot,’  as  we  say.  Then  there  should  be  occasional  recur¬ 
rent  summaries  of  extensive  stretches  of  previous  recitations 
BO  as  to  put  the  old  material  in  the  new  perspective  that 
later  material  has  supplied. 

Fifth,  and  finally,  while  recitations  should  at  their  close 
provide  a  sense  of  what  has  been  accomplished  and  learned, 
the  minds  of  pupils  should  even  more  be  put  on  the  qui  vive 
through  a  sense  of  some  coming  topic,  some  problem  still  in 
suspense,  just  as  in  a  cleverly  constructed  story  or  drama 
each  section  leaves  the  mind  looking  ahead,  eager  to  re¬ 
sume  the  thread.  There  is  an  old  story  to  the  effect  that  the 
1  See  page  47.  *  See  page  65. 


268  HOW  WE  THINK 

way  to  educate  a  baby  is  to  begin  with  the  grandparents,  It 
may  be  said  with  more  practicability  that  the  way  to  arouse 
the  mind,  to  awaken  it  to  activity  in  any  particular  case,  is 
to  make  sure  that  desire  to  go  on  has  been  left  as  a  deposit 
by  prior  recitations. 

The  Recitation  Should  Test  What  Has  Been  Acquired 

There  is  not  much  additional  to  be  said  on  the  score  of 
the  third  function  of  the  recitation,  testing.  Testing  should 
be  a  constant  function.  The  mistake  lies  in  supposing  that 
the  need  for  testing  is  met  merely  by  tests  of  ability  to  re¬ 
produce  subject  matter  that  has  been  committed  to  memory. 
The  previous  discussion  shows  that  that  object  is  incidental. 
The  important  thing  is  to  test  (o)  progress  in  understand¬ 
ing  subject  matter,  (b)  ability  to  use  what  has  been  learned 
as  an  instrumentality  of  further  stildy  and  learning,  (c)  im¬ 
provement  in  the  general  habits  and  attitudes  that  underlie 
thinking;  curiosity,  orderliness,  power  to  review,  to  sum  up, 
and  to  define,  openness  and  honesty  of  mind,  etc. 


III.  The  Conduct  of  the  Recitation 

We  shall  now  go  over  the  material  already  stated  by  con¬ 
sidering  the  conduct  of  the  recitation  as  a  unity. 

The  First  Need:  Preparation  of  Pupils 

The  first  need  is  readiness,  preparation  on  the  part  of  stu¬ 
dents.  The  best,  indeed  the  only,  preparation  needed  is 
arousal  to  a  perception  of  something  that  needs  explanation, 
something  unexpected,  puzzling,  peculiar.  When  the  feeling 
of  a  genuine  perplexity  lays  hold  of  any  mind  (no  matter 
how  the  feeling  arises) ,  that  mind  is  alert  and  inquiring,  be¬ 
cause  stimulated  from  within.  The  shock,  the  bite,  of  a  ques- 


recitation  and  training  thought  269 

tion  will  force  the  mind  to  go  wherever  it  is  capable  of  go¬ 
ing,  better  than  will  the  moat  ingenious  pedagogical  devices 
unaccompanied  by  this  mental  ardor.  It  is  the  sense  of  a 
problem  to  be  mastered,  a  purpose  to  be  realized,  that  forces 
the  mind  to  a  survey  and  recall  of  the  past  to  discover  what 
the  question  means  and  how  it  may  be  dealt  with. 

The  teacher,  in  his  more  deliberate  attempts  to  call  into 
play  the  familiar  elements  in  a  student’s  experience,  must 
guard  against  certain  dangers.  First,  the  step  of  preparation 
must  not  be  too  long  continued  or  too  exhaustive,  or  it  de¬ 
feats  its  own  end.  The  pupil  loses  interest  and  is  bored, 
whereas  a  plunge  in  medias  res  might  have  braced  him  to 
his  work.  The  preparation  part  of  the  recitation  period  of 
some  conscientious  teachers  reminds  one  of  the  boy  who 
takes  so  long  a  run  in  order  to  gain  headway  for  a  jump  that, 
when  he  reaches  the  line,  he  is  too  tired  to  jump  far.  Second, 
the  organs  by  which  we  apprehend  new  material  are  our 
habits.  To  insist  too  minutely  upon  turning  over  habitual 
dispositions  into  conscious  ideas  is  to  interfere  with  their 
best  workings.  Some  factors  of  familiar  experience  must  in¬ 
deed  be  brought  to  conscious  recognition,  just  as  trans¬ 
planting  is  necessary  for  the  best  growth  of  some  plants. 
But  it  is  fatal  to  be  forever  digging  up  either  experiences 
or  plants  to  see  how  they  are  getting  along.  There  is  no  mis¬ 
take  more  common  in  schools  than  ignoring  the  self-propell¬ 
ing  power  of  an  idea.  Once  it  is  aroused,  an  alert  mind  fairly 
races  along  with  it.  Of  itself  it  carries  the  student  into  new 
fields ;  it  branches  out  into  new  ideas  as  a  plant  sends  forth 
new  shoots. 

The  Degree  of  Participation  by  the  Teacher 

The  practical  question  of  how  much  new  subject  matter 
the  teacher  should  introduce  in  the  course  of  a  discussion 
was  taken  up  in  one  of  its  aspects  when  we  were  discussing 


HOW  WE  THINK 


270 

the  place  of  information.  In  some  quarters,  however,  the 
fear  lest  the  adult  instructor  make  the  young  pupil  unduly 
dependent  on  others  has  led  to  a  morbid  fear  of  the  teach¬ 
er’s  taking  an  active  part  in  the  class.  The  practical  problem 
of  the  teacher  is  to  preserve  a  balance  between  so  little 
showing  and  telling  as  to  fail  to  stimulate  reflection  and  so 
much  as  to  choke  thought.  Provided  the  student  is  genuinely 
engaged  upon  a  topic,  and  provided  the  teacher  is  willing  to 
give  the  student  a  good  deal  of  leeway  as  to  what  he  assimi¬ 
lates  and  retains  (not  requiring  rigidly  that  everything  be 
grasped  or  reproduced),  there  is  comparatively  little  danger 
that  one  who  is  himself  enthusiastic  will  communicate  too 
much  concerning  a  topic.  If  a  genuine  community  spirit  per¬ 
vades  the  group,  if  the  atmosphere  is  that  of  free  communi¬ 
cation  in  a  developing  exchange  of  experiences  and  sugges¬ 
tions,  it  is  absurd  to  debar  the  teacher  from  the  privilege 
and  responsibility  freely  granted  to  the  young,  that  of  con¬ 
tributing  his  share.  The  only  warning  is  that  the  teacher 
should  not  forestall  the  contributions  of  pupils,  but  should 
enter  especially  at  the  critical  junctures  where  the  experi¬ 
ence  of  pupils  is  too  limited  to  supply  just  the  material 
needed. 

The  objection  most  commonly  brought  against  the  type 
of  free  social  discussion  here  recommended  is  that  it  becomes 
aimless,  and  gets  nowhere,  that  discussion  is  dispersive, 
children  jumping  from  one  thing  to  another,  till  unity  is 
destroyed  and  pupils  are  left  with  a  sense  of  futility.  There 
is  no  doubt  of  the  reality  of  the  danger  thus  suggested.  But 
if  the  young  are  to  he  prepared  when  they  leave  school  to 
take  an  effective  part  in  a  democratic  society,  the  danger 
must  be  faced  and  conquered.  Many  of  the  failures  of  demo¬ 
cratic  government  (which  are  used  by  critics  to  condemn 
the  whole  undertaking)  are  due  to  the  fact  that  adults  are 
unable  to  share  in  joint  conference  and  consultation  on  so- 


RECITATION  AND  TRAINING  THOUGHT  271 

cial  questions  and  issues.  They  can  neither  contribute  in¬ 
telligently,  nor  can  they  follow  and  judge  the  contributions 
of  others.  The  habits  set  up  in  their  earlier  schooling  have 
not  fitted  them  for  this  enterprise;  the  habits  even  stand  in 
the  way. 

Making  the  Pupil  Justify  His  Contributions 

One  of  the  moat  important  factors  in  preventing  an  aim¬ 
less  and  discursive  recitation  consists  in  making  it  neces¬ 
sary  for  every  student  to  follow  up  and  justify  the  sugges¬ 
tions  he  offers.  He  should  be  held  responsible  for  working 
out  mentally  every  suggested  principle  so  as  to  show  what 
he  means  by  it,  how  it  bears  upon  the  facts  at  hand,  and 
how  the  facts  bear  upon  it.  Unless  the  pupil  is  made  respon¬ 
sible  for  developing  on  his  own  account  the  reasonableness 
of  the  guess  he  puts  forth,  the  recitation  counts  for  practi¬ 
cally  nothing  in  the  training  of  reasoning  power.  A  clever 
teacher  easily  acquires  great  skill  in  dropping  out  the  inept 
and  senseless  contributions  of  pupils,  and  in  selecting  and 
emphasizing  those  in  line  with  the  result  he  wishes  to  reach. 
But  this  method  (sometimes  called  ‘  suggestive  question¬ 
ing  ’)  relieves  the  pupils  of  intellectual  responsibility,  save 
for  acrobatic  agility  of  mind  in  following  the  teacher's  lead. 

The  working  over  of  a  vague  and  more  or  less  casual  idea 
into  coherent  and  definite  form  is  impossible  without  a 
pause,  without  freedom  from  distraction.  We  say,  “  Stop  and 
think  well,  all  reflection  involves,  at  some  point,  stopping 
external  observations  and  reactions  so  that  an  idea  may 
mature.  Meditation,  withdrawal  or  abstraction  from  clam¬ 
orous  assailants  of  the  senses  and  from  demands  for  overt 
action,  is  as  necessary  at  the  reasoning  stage  as  are  observa¬ 
tion  and  experiment  at  other  periods.  The  metaphors  of 
digestion  and  assimilation,  which  so  readily  occur  to  mind 
in  connection  with  rational  elaboration,  are  highly  instruc- 


272  HOW  WE  THINK 

tive.  A  ailent,  uninterrupted  working-over  of  conaiderationa 
by  comparing  and  weighing  alternative  suggeations  ia  in- 
diapensable  for  the  development  of  coherent  and  compact 
conclusiona.  Reaaoning  ia  no  more  akin  to  disputing  or  argu¬ 
ing  or  to  the  abrupt  seizing  and  dropping  of  suggeations  than 
digestion  is  to  a  noisy  champing  of  the  jaws.  The  teacher 
must  permit  opportunity  for  leisurely  mental  digestion. 

The  holding,  metaphorically,  of  a  stop-watch  over  stu¬ 
dents  in  a  recitation,  exacting  prompt  and  speedy  responses 
from  them,  ia  not  conducive  to  building  up  a  reflective  habit 
of  mind. 

Avoiding  Distraction  by  Focussing  upon  a  Central  Topic  or 
Typical  Object 

The  teacher  must  avert  the  distraction  that  ensues  from 
putting  before  the  mind  a  number  of  facta  on  the  same  level 
of  importance.  Since  attention  is  selective,  some  one  object 
normally  claims  thought  and  furnishes  the  center  of  depar¬ 
ture  and  reference.  This  fact  is  fatal  to  the  success  of  the 
pedagogical  methods  that  put  before  the  mind  a  row  of 
objects  of  equal  importance.  In  reaching  a  generalization 
the  mind  does  not  naturally  begin  with  objects  a,  b,  c,  d, 
and  try  to  find  the  respect  in  which  they  agree.  It  begins 
with  a  single  object  or  situation,  more  or  less  vague  and  in¬ 
choate  in  meaning,  and  makes  excursions  to  other  objects  in 
order  to  render  understanding  of  the  central  object  consist¬ 
ent  and  clear.  A  mere  multiplication  of  objects  is  adverse 
to  successful  reaaoning.  Each  fact  brought  within  the  field 
of  thought  should  clear  up  some  obscure  feature  or  extend 
some  fragmentary  trait  of  the  primary  object. 

In  short,  pains  should  be  taken  to  see  that  the  object  on 
which  thought  centers  ia  typical.  Material  is  typical  when, 
although  individual  or  specific,  it  is  such  as  readily  and 
fruitfully  suggests  the  principles  of  an  entire  class  of  facts. 


EECITATION  AND  TRAINING  THOUGHT  273 

No  sane  person,  for  example,  begins  to  think  about  rivers 
wholesale  or  at  large.  He  begins  with  the  one  river  that  has 
presented  some  puzzling  trait.  Then  he  studies  other  rivers 
to  get  light  upon  the  baffling  features  of  this  one,  and  at  the 
same  time  he  employs  the  characteristic  traits  of  his  original 
object  to  reduce  to  order  the  multifarious  details  that  appear 
in  connection  with  other  rivers.  This  working  back  and  forth 
preserves  unity  of  meaning,  while  protecting  it  from  monot¬ 
ony  and  narrowness.  The  mind  needs  to  be  defended  against 
the  deadening  influence  of  many  isolated  particulars  and 
also  against  the  barrenness  of  a  merely  formal  principle. 
The  inherent  significance  of  generalization  is  that  it  frees  a 
meaning  from  local  restrictions;  generalization  is  meaning 
so  freed;  it  is  meaning  emancipated  from  accidental  features 
so  as  to  be  available  in  new  cases.  The  surest  test  for  de¬ 
tecting  a  spurious  generalization  {a  statement  general  in 
verbal  form  but  not  accompanied  by  discernment  of  mean¬ 
ing)  is  the  failure  of  the  so-called  ‘  principle  ’  spontaneously 
to  extend  itself.  A  central  idea  moves  of  its  own  accord  to 
application;  it  seeks  opportunity  for  operation  in  use  to 
bring  other  facts  into  line.® 


IV,  The  Function  of  the  Tbachbb 
The  Teacher  as  Leader 

The  older  type  of  instruction  tended  to  treat  the  teacher 
as  a  dictatorial  ruler.  The  newer  type  sometimes  treats  the 
teacher  as  a  negligible  factor,  almost  as  an  evil,  though  a 
necessary  one.  In  reality  the  teacher  is  the  intellectual  leader 
of  a  social  group.  He  is  a  leader,  not  in  virtue  of  official 
position,  but  because  of  wider  and  deeper  knowledge  and 
matured  experience,  The  supposition  that  the  principle  of 
3  See  page  187, 


274  HOW  WE  THINK 

freedom  confers  liberty  upon  the  pupils,  but  that  the  teacher 
is  outside  its  range  and  must  abdicate  all  leadership  is 
merely  silly. 

Fallacious  Notions  Minimizing  His  Leadership 

In  some  schools  the  tendency  to  minimize  the  place  of  the 
teacher  takes  the  form  of  supposing  that  it  is  an  arbitrary 
imposition  for  the  teacher  to  propose  the  line  of  work  to  be 
followed  or  to  arrange  the  situation  within  which  problems 
and  topics  arise.  It  is  held  that,  out  of  due  respect  for  the 
mental  freedom  of  those  taught,  all  suggestions  are  to  come 
from  them.  Especially  has  this  idea  been  applied  in  some 
kindergartens  and  primary  grades.  The  result  is  often  that 
described  in  the  story  of  a  young  child  who,  on  arriving  at 
school,  said  to  the  teacher:  “  Do  we  have  to  do  to-day  what 
we  want  to  do?  ”  The  alternative  to  proposals  by  the  teacher 
is  that  the  suggestions  of  things  to  do  come  from  chance, 
from  casual  contacts,  from  what  the  child  saw  on  his  way 
to  school,  what  he  did  yesterday,  what  he  sees  the  next  child 
doing,  etc.  Since  the  purpose  to  be  carried  out  must  come, 
directly  or  indirectly,  from  somewhere  in  the  environment, 
denial  to  the  teacher  of  the  power  to  propose  it  merely  sub¬ 
stitutes  accidental  contact  with  some  other  person  or  scene 
for  the  intelligent  planning  of  the  very  individual  who,  if 
he  has  a  right  to  be  a  teacher  at  all,  has  the  best  knowledge 
of  the  needs  and  possibilities  of  the  members  of  the  group 
of  which  he  is  a  part. 

His  Need  of  Abundant  Knowledge 

The  practically  important  question  concerns  the  condi¬ 
tions  under  which  the  teacher  can  really  be  the  intellectual 
leader  of  a  social  group.  The  first  condition  goes  back  to  his 
own  intellectual  preparation  in  subject  matter.  This  should 
be  abundant  to  the  point  of  overflow.  It  must  be  much  wider 


RECITATION  AND  TRAINING  THOUGHT  275 
than  the  ground  laid  out  in  textbook  or  in  any  fixed  plan  for 
teaching  a  lesson.  It  must  cover  collateral  points,  so  that 
the  teacher  can  take  advantage  of  unexpected  questions  or 
unanticipated  incidents.  It  must  be  accompanied  by  a  genu¬ 
ine  enthusiasm  for  the  subject  that  will  communicate  itself 
contagiously  to  pupils. 

Some  of  the  reasons  why  the  teacher  should  have  an  ex¬ 
cess  supply  of  information  and  understanding  are  too  ob¬ 
vious  to  need  mention.  The  central  reason  is  possibly  not 
always  recognized.  The  teacher  must  have  his  mind  free  to 
observe  the  mental  responses  and  movements  of  the  stu¬ 
dent  members  of  the  recitation-group.  The  problem  of  the 
pupils  is  found  in  subject  matter;  the  problem  of  teachers  is 
what  the  minds  of  pupils  are  doing  with  this  subject  matter. 
Unless  the  teacher's  mind  has  mastered  the  subject  matter  in 
advance,  unless  it  is  thoroughly  at  home  in  it,  using  it  un¬ 
consciously  without  the  need  of  express  thought,  he  will  not 
be  free  to  give  full  time  and  attention  to  observation  and  in¬ 
terpretation  of  the  pupils’  intellectual  reactions,  The  teacher 
must  be  alive  to  all  forms  of  bodily  expression  of  mental 
condition  —  to  puzzlement,  boredom,  mastery,  the  dawn  of 
an  idea,  feigned  attention,  tendency  to  show  off,  to  domi¬ 
nate  discussion  because  of  egotism,  etc.  —  as  well  as  sensitive 
to  the  meaning  of  all  expression  in  words.  He  must  be  aware  j 
not  only  of  their  meaning,  but  of  their  meaning  as  indicative 
of  the  state  of  mind  of  the  pupil,  his  degree  of  observation 
and  comprehension. 

His  Need  of  Technical,  Professional  Knowledge 

The  fact  that  the  teacher  has  to  be  a  student  of  the  pupil's 
mind,  as  the  latter  is  a  student  of  subject  matter  in  various 
fields,  accounts  for  the  teacher’s  need  for  technical  knowl¬ 
edge  as  well  as  for  knowledge  in  the  subjects  taught.  By 
‘  technical  knowledge  ’  is  here  meant  professional  knowl- 


HOW  WE  THINK 


276 

edge.  Why  should  a  teacher  have  acquaintance  with  psy¬ 
chology,  history  of  education,  the  methods  found  helpful  by 
others  in  teaching  various  subjects?  For  two  main  reasons: 
the  one  reason  is  that  he  may  be  equipped  to  note  what 
would  otherwise  go  unheeded  in  the  responses  of  the  stu¬ 
dents  and  may  quickly  and  correctly  interpret  what  pupils 
do  and  say;  the  other  reason  is  that  he  may  be  ready  to  give 
proper  aid  when  needed  because  of  his  knowledge  of  proce¬ 
dures  that  others  have  found  useful. 

Unfortunately  this  professional  knowledge  is  sometimes 
treated,  not  as  a  guide  and  tool  in  personal  observation  and 
judgment  —  which  it  essentially  is  —  but  as  a  set  of  fixed 
rules  of  procedure  in  action.  When  a  teacher  finds  such 
theoretical  knowledge  coming  between  him  and  his  own 
common-sense  judgment  of  a  situation,  the  wise  thing  is  to 
follow  his  own  judgment — making  sure,  of  course,  that  it  is 
an  enlightened  insight.  For  tmless  the  professional  informa¬ 
tion  enlightens  his  own  perception  of  the  situation  and  what 
to  do  about  it,  it  becomes  either  a  purely  mechanical  device 
or  else  a  load  of  undigested  material. 

Finally  the  teacher,  in  order  to  be  a  leader,  must  make 
special  preparation  for  particular  lessons.  Otherwise  the 
only  alternatives  will  be  either  aimless  drift  or  else  sticking 
literally  to  the  text.  Flexibility,  ability  to  take  advantage 
of  unexpected  incidents  and  questions,  depends  upon  the 
teacher’s  coming  to  the  subject  with  freshness  and  fullness 
of  interest  and  knowledge.  There  are  questions  that  he 
should  ask  before  the  recitation  commences.  What  do  the 
minds  of  pupils  bring  to  the  topic  from  their  previous  ex¬ 
perience  and  study?  How  can  I  help  them  make  connec¬ 
tions?  What  need,  even  if  unrecognized  by  them,  will  fur¬ 
nish  a  leverage  by  which  to  move  their  minds  in  the  desired 
direction?  What  uses  and  applications  will  clarify  the  sub¬ 
ject  and  fix  it  in  their  minds?  How  can  the  topic  be  individu- 


EECITATION  AND  TBAINING  THOUGHT  277 
alized;  that  is,  how  shall  it  be  treated  so  that  each  one  will 
have  something  distinctive  to  contribute  while  the  subject 
is  also  adapted  to  the  special  deficiencies  and  particular 
tastes  of  each  one? 


V.  Appreciation 
The  Realization  of  Value 

I 

j  To  experience  a  thing  fully  is  in  familiar  phrase  to  get  a 
‘realizing  sense’  of  it;  or,  in  synonymous  expressions,  to 
have  it  come  home  to  one,  to  have  it  take  possession.  When 
this  happens,  the  person  is  '  warm,’  as  children  say  in  their 
searching  games.  B  arriers  and  obstructions  that  have  previ¬ 
ously  come  between  the  mind  and  some  object,  truth,  or 
situation,  fall  away.  The  mind  and  the  subject  seem  to  come 
together  and  unite.  This  is  the  state  of  affairs  that  is  desig¬ 
nated  by  the  word  ‘  appreciation.’  We  sometimes  speak  of 
things  ‘  appreciating  ’  in  value,  the  opposite  being  '  depre¬ 
ciation  ’  as  objects  grow  stale,  out  of  date,  and  wanted  by 
no  one.  When  the  mind  thoroughly  appreciates  anything, 
that  object  is  experienced  with  heightened  intensity  of  value. 
There  is  no  inherent  opposition  between  thought,  knowledge, 
and  appreciation.  There  is,  however,  a  definite  opposition 
between  an  idea  or  a  fact  grasped  merely  intellectually  and 
the  idea  or  fact  which  is  emotionally  colored  because  it  is 
felt  to  be  connected  with  the  needs  and  satisfactions  of  the 
whole  personality.  In  the  latter  case,  it  has  immediate  value ; 
that  is,  it  is  appreciated. 

Its  Role  in  Thinking 

In  what  has  been  said  throughout  the  book  about  the 
necessity  of  situations  and  problems  that  are  vitally  real  to 


HOW  WE  THINK 


278 

students  ^  it  has  been  implied  that  no  separation  exists  be¬ 
tween  thinking  and  realization,  between  intellectual  activ¬ 
ity  and  appreciation.  This  implicit  idea  will  now  be  briefly 
considered  with  the  purpose  of  making  explicit  the  basic 
importance  of  appreciation  to  thought. 

There  is  a  tendency  in  schools  that  are  breaking  away 
from  traditional  methods  of  routine  discipline,  of  drill  and 
literal  reproduction  of  subject  matter,  to  make  a  sharp 
separation  between  subjects  that  involve  mastery  of  facts 
and  principles  (like  arithmetic,  grammar,  physical  science, 
the  larger  part  of  geography)  on  the  one  side,  and  literature, 
music,  and  the  fine  arts  on  the  other  side.  The  need  for  per¬ 
sonal  appreciation  is  supposed  to  be  confined  to  the  latter 
group  of  subjects,  When  this  idea  is  acted  upon,  the  latter 
subjects  tend  to  become  sentimental  and  imaginative  (in  the 
sense  of  merely  imaginary  and  unreal),  while  freedom  of 
self-expression  turns  into  something  that  might  better  be 
called  ‘  self-exposure.’ 

The  evil  that  especially  concerns  us  in  this  connection, 
however,  is  failure  to  see  that  vital  appreciations  — that  is, 
ideas  involving  emotional  response  and  imaginative  projec¬ 
tion —  are  ultimately  as  necessary  in  history,  mathematics, 
scientific  fields,  in  all  so-called  '  informational '  and  ‘  intel¬ 
lectual  ’  subjects,  as  they  are  in  literature  and  the  fine  arts. 
Human  beings  are  not  normally  divided  into  two  parts,  the 
one  emotional,  the  other  coldly  intellectual  —  the  one  mat¬ 
ter  of  fact,  the  other  imaginative.  The  split  does,  indeed, 
often  get  established,  but  that  is  always  because  of  false 
methods  of  education.  Natively  and  normally  the  person¬ 
ality  works  as  a  whole.  There  is  no  integration  of  character 
and  mind  unless  there  is  fusion  of  the  intellectual  and  the 
emotional,  of  meaning  and  value,  of  fact  and  imaginative 
running  beyond  fact  into  the  realm  of  desired  possibilities, 
^  For  example,  on  pages  99-100, 


recitation  and  training  thought  279 

The  final  test  of  any  recitation  in  any  subject  is  the  extent 
in  which  pupils  secure  vital  appreciation  of  the  subject 
matter  dealt  with.  Otherwise  problems  and  questions,  which 
are  the  only  true  instigators  of  reflective  activity,  will  be 
more  or  less  externally  imposed  and  only  half-heartedly  felt 
and  dealt  with. 


CHAPTER  NINETEEN 


SOME  GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS 


We  shall  conclude  our  survey  of  how  we  think  and  how 
we  should  think  by  presenting  some  factors  of  thinking  that 
should  balance  each  other,  but  that  constantly  tend  to  be¬ 
come  so  isolated  that  they  work  against  each  other  instead 
of  cooperating  to  make  reflective  inquiry  eflScient. 


I.  The  Unconscious  and  the  Conscious 
Implicit  and  Explicit  Context 

It  is  significant  that  one  meaning  of  the  term  ‘  under¬ 
stood  ’  is  something  so  thoroughly  mastered,  so  completely 
agreed  upon,  as  to  be  assumed;  that  is  to  say,  something 
taken  as  a  matter  of  course  without  explicit  statement.  The 
familiar  "  it  goes  without  saying  ”  means  “  it  is  understood." 
If  two  persons  can  converse  intelligently  with  each  other,  it 
is  because  a  common  experience  supplies  a  background  of 
mutual  understanding  upon  which  their  respective  remarks 
are  projected.  To  dig  up  and  to  formulate  this  common  back¬ 
ground  would  be  imbecile;  it  is  "understood";  that  is,  it 
is  silently  sup-plied  and  ira-plied  as  the  taken-for-granted 
medium  of  intelligent  exchange  of  ideas. 

If,  however,  the  two  persons  find  themselves  at  cross- 
purposes,  it  is  necessary  to  dig  up  and  compare  the  pre¬ 
suppositions,  the  implied  context,  on  the  basis  of  which  each 
is  speaking.  The  im-plicit  is  made  ex-plicit;  what  was  un¬ 
consciously  assumed  is  exposed  to  the  light  of  conscious  day. 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS  281 

In  this  -way,  the  root  of  the  misunderstanding  is  removed. 
Some  such  rhythm  of  the  unconscious  and  the  conscious,  of 
going  ahead  and  of  analysis,  is  involved  in  all  fruitful  think¬ 
ing.  A  person  in  pursuing  a  consecutive  train  of  thoughts 
takes  some  system  of  ideas  for  granted  (which  accordingly 
he  leaves  unexpressed,  ‘  unconscious  ’)  as  surely  as  he 
does  in  conversing  with  others.  Some  context,  some  situa¬ 
tion,  some  controlling  purpose  dominates  his  explicit  ideas 
so  thoroughly  that  it  does  not  need  to  be  consciously  formu¬ 
lated  and  expounded.  Explicit  thinking  goes  on  within  the 
limits  of  what  is  implied  or  understood.  Yet  the  fact  that 
reflection  originates  in  a  problem  makes  it  necessary  at  some 
points  consciously  to  inspect  and  examine  this  familiar 
background.  We  have  to  turn  upon  some  unconscious  as¬ 
sumption  and  make  it  explicit. 

No  rules  can  be  laid  down  for  attaining  the  due  balance 
and  rhythm  of  these  two  phases  of  mental  life.  No  ordi¬ 
nance  can  prescribe  at  just  what  point  the  spontaneous 
working  of  some  unconscious  attitude  and  habit  is  to  be 
checked  till  we  have  made  explicit  what  is  implied  in  it. 
No  one  is  wise  enough  to  tell  in  detail  just  when  and  how 
far  analytic  inspection  and  conscious  statement  should  be 
engaged  in.  We  can  say  that  they  must  be  carried  far  enough 
so  that  the  individual  will  know  what  he  is  about  and  be 
able  to  guide  his  thinking;  but  in  a  given  case  just  how  far 
is  that?  We  can  say  that  they  must  be  carried  far  enough  to 
detect  and  guard  against  the  source  of  some  false  perception 
or  reasoning,  and  to  get  a  leverage  on  an  investigation;  but 
such  statements  only  restate  the  original  difficulty.  Since  our 
reliance  must  be  upon  the  disposition  and  tact  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  in  the  particular  case,  there  is  no  test  of  the  success 
of  an  education  more  important  than  whether  it  nurtures  a 
type  of  mind  that  maintains  a  balance  of  the  unconscious 
and  the  conscious. 


HOW  WE  THINK 


282 

The  ways  of  teaching  criticized  in  the  foregoing  pages  as 
false  '  analytic  ’  methods  of  instruction,  all  reduce  them¬ 
selves  to  the  mistake  of  directing  explicit  attention  and 
formulation  to  what  would  work  better  if  left  an  uncon¬ 
scious  attitude  and  working  assumption.  To  pry  into  the 
familiar,  the  usual,  the  automatic,  simply  for  the  sake  of 
making  it  conscious,  simply  for  the  sake  of  formulating  it, 
is  both  an  impertinent  interference  and  a  source  of  bore¬ 
dom.  To  be  forced  to  dwell  consciously  upon  the  accus¬ 
tomed  is  the  essence  of  ennui.  Methods  of  instruction  that 
have  that  tendency  dull  curiosity. 

On  the  other  hand,  what  has  been  said  in  criticism  of 
merely  routine  forms  of  skill,  what  has  been  said  about  the 
importance  of  having  a  genuine  problem,  of  introducing  the 
novel,  and  of  reaching  a  deposit  of  general  meaning  weighs 
on  the  other  side  of  the  scales.  It  is  fatal  to  good  thinking  to 
fail  to  make  conscious  the  standing  source  of  some  error  or 
recurring  failure  as  well  as  to  pry  needlessly  into  what 
works  smoothly.  To  over-simplify,  to  exclude  the  novel  for 
the  sake  of  prompt  skill,  to  avoid  obstacles  for  the  sake  of 
averting  errors,  is  as  detrimental  as  to  try  to  get  pupils  to 
formulate  everything  they  know  and  to  state  every  step  of 
the  procedure  by  which  a  result  was  obtained.  Where  the 
shoe  pinches,  analytic  examination  is  indicated.  When  a 
topic  is  to  be  clinched  so  that  knowledge  of  it  will  carry  over 
and  be  an  effective  resource  in  further  topics,  conscious  sum¬ 
marizing  and  organization  are  imperative.  In  the  early 
stage  of  acquaintance  with  a  subject,  a  good  deal  of  uncon¬ 
strained  unconscious  mental  play  about  it  may  be  per¬ 
mitted,  even  at  the  risk  of  some  random  experimenting;  in 
the  later  stages,  conscious  formulation  and  review  may  be 
encouraged.  Projection  and  reflection,  going  directly  ahead 
and  turning  back  in  scrutiny,  should  alternate.  Unconscious- 


283 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS 

neas  gives  spontaneity  and  freshness;  consciousness,  com¬ 
mand  and  control. 

An  Illustration  from  Control  of  Reflective  Thinking 

The  point  may  be  illustrated  by  the  analysis  in  this  vol¬ 
ume  of  the  phases  of  reflective  activity.  Some  readers  may 
get  the  idea  that  it  is  intended  that  students  in  their  study 
and  recitation  should  be  made  consciously  to  note  and 
formulate  these  various  phases  as  a  means  of  intellectual 
control.  Such  a  notion  is,  however,  foreign  to  the  spirit  of  the 
analysis.  For  it  holds  that  fundamental  control  is  effected  by 
means  of  the  conditions  under  which  students  work — the 
provision  of  a  real  situation  that  arouses  inquiry,  suggestion, 
reasoning,  testing,  etc.  The  chief  value  of  the  analysis  that 
has  been  given  is  therefore  to  suggest  to  teachers  the  ways 
in  which  reflective  thought  may  be  best  secured  in  students 
without  the  latter  being  made  conscious  at  every  step  of 
their  own  attitudes  and  processes.  It  is  also  true  that,  after 
the  instructor  has  once  provided  the  conditions  most  likely 
to  call  out  and  direct  thinking,  the  student’s  subsequent 
activity,  while  conscious  of  ends  and  means,  may  be  uncon¬ 
scious  with  respect  to  his  own  personal  attitudes  and  pro¬ 
cedures.  The  familiar  fact  that  creative  work  in  the  arts, 
writing,  painting,  music,  etc.,  is  largely  unconscious  as  to 
the  motives  and  attitudes  of  the  artist,  his  mind  being  fixed 
on  the  objects  he  is  dealing  with  or  constructing,  suggests 
the  adoption  of  a  like  course  in  both  study  and  teaching. 
The  artist  should  be  taken  as  a  model  rather  than  the  activi¬ 
ties  of  one  painfully  conscious  at  every  step  of  just  how  he  is 
operating.  Control  should  be  exercised  by  the  set-up  of  the 
situation  itself.  Yet  in  conditions  of  unusual  perplexity  or 
repeated  error  it  will  usually  be  a  help  if  conscious  attention 
goes  back  to  such  causes  as  lie  in  the  attitudes  and  processes 
of  the  learner. 


284 


HOW  WE  THINK 


Absorption  and  Incubation 

It  is  a  common  experience  that  after  prolonged  preoccu¬ 
pation  with  an  intellectual  topic,  the  mind  ceases  to  function 
readily.  It  apparently  has  got  into  a  rut;  the  '  wheels  go 
around  ’  in  the  head,  but  they  do  not  turn  out  any  fresh 
grist.  New  suggestions  cease  to  occur.  The  mind  is,  as  the 
apt  expression  goes,  '  fed  up.’  This  condition  is  a  warning 
to  turn,  as  far  as  conscious  attention  and  reflection  are  con¬ 
cerned,  to  something  else.  Then  after  the  mind  has  ceased 
to  be  intent  on  the  problem,  and  consciousness  has  relaxed 
its  strain,  a  period  of  incubation  sets  in.  Material  rearranges 
itself;  facta  and  principles  fall  into  place;  what  was  con¬ 
fused  becomes  bright  and  clear;  the  mixed-up  becomes  or¬ 
derly,  often  to  such  an  extent  that  the  problem  is  essen¬ 
tially  solved.  Many  persona  having  a  complicated  practical 
question  to  decide  find  it  advisable  to  sleep  on  the  matter. 
Often  they  awake  in  the  morning  to  find  that,  while  they 
were  sleeping,  things  have  wonderfully  straightened  them¬ 
selves  out.  A  subtle  process  of  incubation  has  resulted  in 
hatching  a  decision  and  a  plan.  But  this  bringing  forth  of 
inventions,  solutions,  and  discoveries  rarely  occurs  except 
to  a  mind  that  has  previously  steeped  itself  consciously  in 
material  relating  to  its  question,  has  turned  matters  off  and 
over,  weighed  pros  and  cons.  Incubation,  in  short,  is  one 
phase  of  a  rhythmic  process. 


II.  Peocebs  and  Peoduct 
Play  and  Work  Again 

A  like  balance  in  mental  life  characterizes  process  and 
product.  We  met  one  important  phase  of  this  adjustment  in 
considering  play  and  work.  In  play,  interest  centers  in  ac- 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS  285 

tivity,  without  much  reference  to  its  outcome.  The  sequence 
of  deeds,  images,  emotions,  suffices  on  its  own  account.  In 
work,  the  end  holds  attention  and  controls  the  notice  given 
to  means.  Since  the  diSerence  is  one  of  direction  of  inter¬ 
est,  the  contrast  is  one  of  emphasis,  not  of  cleavage,  When 
comparative  prominence  in  consciousness  of  activity  or  out¬ 
come  is  transformed  into  isolation  of  one  from  the  other, 
play  degenerates  into  fooling,  and  work  into  drudgery. 

Play  Should  Not  Be  Fooling 

By  ‘  fooling  ’  we  understand  a  series  of  disconnected  tem¬ 
porary  overflows  of  energy  dependent  upon  whim  and  acci¬ 
dent.  When  all  reference  to  outcome  is  eliminated  from  the 
sequence  of  ideas  and  acts  that  make  play,  each  member  of 
the  sequence  is  cut  loose  from  every  other  and  becomes  fan¬ 
tastic,  arbitrary,  aimless;  mere  fooling  follows.  There  is 
some  inveterate  tendency  to  fool  in  children  as  well  as  in 
animals;  the  tendency  is  not  wholly  evil,  for  it  militates 
against  falling  into  ruts.  Even  indulgence  in  dreaming  and 
fancies  may  give  mind  a  start  in  a  new  direction.  But  when 
they  are  excessive  in  amount,  dissipation  and  disintegration 
follow ;  and  the  only  way  of  preventing  this  result  is  to  see 
to  it  that  the  children  look  ahead  and  forecast,  to  some 
extent,  the  ends  of  their  activity,  the  effects  it  is  likely  to 
produce. 

Work  Should  Not  Be  Drudgery 

However,  exclusive  interest  in  a  result  alters  work  to 
drudgery.  For  by  drudgery  is  meant  those  activities  in 
which  the  interest  in  the  outcome  does  not  suffuse  the 
process  of  getting  the  result.  Whenever  a  piece  of  work  be-f 
comes  drudgery,  the  process  of  doing  loses  all  value  for  tha 
doer ;  he  cares  solely  for  what  is  to  be  had  at  the  end  of  it. 
The  work  itself,  the  putting  forth  of  energy,  is  hateful;  it  is 


HOW  WE  THINK 


286 

just  a  necessary  evil,  since  without  it  some  important  end 
would  be  missed.  Now,  it  is  a  commonplace  that  in  the 
work  of  the  world  many  things  have  to  be  done,  the  doing 
of  which  is  not  intrinsically  very  interesting.  However,  the 
argument  that  children  should  be  kept  doing  drudgery  tasks 
because  thereby  they  acquire  power  to  be  faithful  to  dis¬ 
tasteful  duties  is  wholly  fallacious.  Repulsion,  shirking,  and 
evasion  are  the  consequences  of  having  the  repulsive  im¬ 
posed —  not  loyal  love  of  duty.  Willingness  to  work  for 
ends  by  means  of  acta  not  naturally  attractive  is  best  at¬ 
tained  by  securing  an  appreciation  of  the  value  of  the  end, 
so  that  a  sense  of  its  value  is  transferred  to  its  means  of 
accomplishment.  Not  interesting  in  themselves,  they  borrow 
interest  from  the  result  with  which  they  are  associated. 

Balance  of  the  Work  Attitude  and  the  Play  Attitude 

The  intellectual  harm  accruing  from  divorce  of  work  and 
play,  product  and  process,  is  evidenced  in  the  proverb,  “All 
work  and  no  play  makes  Jack  a  dull  boy.”  That  the  ob¬ 
verse  is  true  is  perhaps  sufficiently  signalized  in  the  fact 
that  fooling  is  so  near  to  foolishness.  To  be  playful  and  seri¬ 
ous  at  the  same  time  is  possible,  and  it  defines  the  ideal 
mental  condition.  Absence  of  dogmatism  and  prejudice, 
presence  of  intellectual  curiosity  and  flexibility,  are  mani¬ 
fest  in  the  free  play  of  the  mind  upon  a  topic.  To  give  the 
mind  this  free  play  is  not  to  encourage  toying  with  a  sub¬ 
ject,  but  is  to  be  interested  in  the  unfolding  of  the  subject 
on  its  own  account,  apart  from  any  subservience  to  a  pre¬ 
conceived  belief  or  habitual  aim,  Mental  play  is  open- 
mindedness,  faith  in  the  power  of  thought  to  preserve  its 
own  integrity  without  external  supports  and  arbitrary  re¬ 
strictions.  Hence  free  mental  play  involves  seriousness,  the 
earnest  following  of  the  development  of  subject  matter.  It 
is  incompatible  with  carelessness  or  flippancy,  for  it  exacts 


287 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS 
accurate  noting  of  every  result  reached  in  order  that  every 
conclusion  may  be  put  to  further  use.  What  is  termed  the 
'  interest  in  truth  for  its  own  sake  ’  is  certainly  a  serious 
matter,  yet  this  pure  interest  in  truth  coincides  with  love 
of  the  free  play  of  thought  in  inquiry. 

In  spite  of  many  appearances  to  the  contrary  —  usually 
due  to  social  conditions  either  of  superfluity  of  means  that  in¬ 
duces  idle  fooling  or  of  undue  economic  pressure  that  com¬ 
pels  drudgery  —  childhood  normally  realizes  the  ideal  of 
conjoint  free  mental  play  and  thoughtfulness.  Successful 
portrayals  of  children  have  always  made  their  wistful  in¬ 
tentness  at  least  as  obvious  as  their  lack  of  worry  for  the 
morrow.  To  live  in  the  present  is  compatible  with  condensa¬ 
tion  of  far-reaching  meanings  in  the  present.  Such  enrich¬ 
ment  of  the  present  for  its  own  sake  is  the  just  heritage  of 
childhood  and  the  best  insurer  of  future  growth.  The  child 
forced  into  premature  concern  with  economic  remote  results 
may  develop  a  surprising  sharpening  of  wits  in  a  particu¬ 
lar  direction,  but  there  is  danger  that  this  precocious  spe¬ 
cialization  will  be  paid  for  by  later  apathy  and  dullness. 

The  Attitude  of  the  Artist 

That  art  originated  in  play  is  a  common  saying.  Whether 
dr  not  the  saying  is  historically  correct,  it  suggests  a  har¬ 
mony  of  mental  playfulness  and  seriousness  that  describes 
the  artistic  ideal.  When  the  artist  is  preoccupied  overmuch 
with  means  and  materials,  he  may  achieve  wonderful  tech¬ 
nique,  but  not  the  artistic  spirit  par  excellence.  When  the 
animating  idea  is  in  excess  of  the  command  of  method,  ses- 
thetic  feeling  may  be  indicated,  but  the  art  of  presentation 
is  too  defective  to  express  the  feeling  thoroughly.  When  the 
thought  of  the  end  becomes  so  adequate  that  it  compels 
translation  into  the  means  that  embody  it,  or  when  atten¬ 
tion  to  means  is  inspired  by  recognition  of  the  end  they 


288  HOW  WE  THINK 

serve,  we  have  the  attitude  typical  of  the  artist,  an  attitude 
that  may  be  displayed  in  all  activities,  even  though  they 
are  not  conventionally  designated  ‘  arts.’ 

f  The  Teacher  as  an  Artist 

That  teaching  is  an  art  and  the  true  teacher  an  artist  is 
a  familiar  saying,  Now  the  teacher’s  own  claim  to  rank  as 
an  artist  is  measured  by  his  ability  to  foster  the  attitude 
of  the  artist  in  those  who  study  with  him,  whether  they  be 
youth  or  little  children.  Some  succeed  in  arousing  enthusi¬ 
asm,  in  communicating  large  ideas,  in  evoking  energy.  So 
far,  well;  but  the  final  test  is  whether  the  stimulus  thus 
given  to  wider  aims  suceeeds  in  transforming  itself  into 
power;  that  is  to  say,  into  the  attention  to  detail  that  en¬ 
sures  mastery  over  means  of  execution.  If  not,  the  zeal  flags, 
the  interest  dies  out,  the  ideal  becomes  a  clouded  memory. 
Other  teachers  succeed  in  training  facility,  skill,  mastery  of 
the  technique  of  subjects.  Again  it  is  well  —  so  far.  But  un¬ 
less  enlargement  of  mental  vision,  power  of  increased  dis¬ 
crimination  of  final  values,  a  sense  for  ideas,  for  principles, 
accompanies  this  training,  forms  of  skill  ready  to  be  put 
indifferently  to  any  end  may  be  the  result.  Such  modes  of 
technical  skill  may  display  themselves,  according  to  circum¬ 
stances,  as  cleverness  in  serving  self-interest,  as  docility  in 
carrying  out  the  purposes  of  others,  or  ns  unimaginative 
plodding  in  ruts.  To  nurture  inspiring  aim  and  executive 
means  into  harmony  with  each  other  is  at  once  the  difficulty 
and  the  reward  of  the  teacher. 

III.  The  Fah  and  the  Neah 

‘Familiarity  Breeds  Contempt’ 

Teachers  who  have  heard  that  they  should  avoid  matters 
foreign  to  pupils’  experience  are  frequently  surprised  to  find 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS  289 

pupils  wake  up  when  something  beyond  their  ken  is  intro- 
ducedj  while  they  remain  apathetic  in  considering  the  fa¬ 
miliar.  In  geography  the  child  upon  the  plains  seems  per¬ 
versely  irresponsive  to  the  intellectual  charms  of  his  local 
environment,  but  fascinated  by  whatever  concerns  moun¬ 
tains  or  the  sea.  Teachers  who  have  struggled  with  little 
avail  to  extract  from  pupils  essays  describing  the  details  of 
things  with  which  they  are  well  acquainted  sometimes  find 
them  eager  to  write  on  lofty  or  imaginary  themes.  A  woman 
of  education,  who  has  recorded  her  experience  as  a  factory 
worker,  tried  retelling  Little  Women  to  some  factory  girls 
during  their  working  hours.  They  cared  little  for  it,  saying, 
"  Those  girls  had  no  more  interesting  experience  than  we 
have,"  and  demanded  stories  of  millionaires  and  society 
lenders.  A  man  interested  in  the  mental  condition  of  those 
engaged  in  routine  labor  asked  a  Scotch  girl  in  a  cotton  fac¬ 
tory  what  she  thought  about  all  day.  She  replied  that,  as 
soon  as  her  mind  was  free  from  starting  the  machinery,  she 
married  a  duke,  and  their  fortunes  occupied  her  for  the 
remainder  of  the  day. 

Naturally,  these  incidents  are  not  told  in  order  to  encour¬ 
age  methods  of  teaching  that  appeal  to  the  sensational,  the 
extraordinary,  or  the  incomprehensible.  They  are  told,  how¬ 
ever,  to  enforce  the  point  that  the  familiar  and  the  near  do 
not  excite  or  repay  thought  on  their  own  account,  but  only 
as  they  are  adjusted  to  mastering  the  strange  and  remote. 
It  is  a  commonplace  of  psychology  that  we  do  not  attend  to 
the  old  or  consciously  mind  that  to  which  we  are  thoroughly 
accustomed.  For  this  there  is  good  reason;  to  devote  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  old,  when  new  circumstances  are  constantly  aris¬ 
ing  to  which  we  should  adjust  ourselves,  would  be  wasteful 
and  dangerous.  Thought  must  be  reserved  for  the  new,  the 
precarious,  the  problematic.  Hence  the  mental  constraint, 
the  sense  of  being  lost,  that  comes  to  pupils  when  they  are 


HOW  WE  THINK 


290 

invited  to  turn  their  thoughts  upon  that  with  which  they  are 
already  familiar.  The  old,  the  near,  the  accustomed,  is  not 
that  to  which  but  that  with  which  we  attend;  it  does  not 
furnish  the  material  of  a  problem,  but  of  its  solution. 

Balancing  the  New  and  the  Old 

The  last  sentence  has  brought  ua  to  the  balancing  of  new 
and  old,  of  the  far  and  that  close  by,  involved  in  reflection. 
The  more  remote  supplies  the  stimulus  and  the  motive ;  the 
nearer  at  hand  furnishes  the  point  of  approach  and  the  avail¬ 
able  resources.  This  principle  may  also  be  stated  in  this 
form:  the  best  thinking  occm's  when  the  easy  and  the  difii- 
cult  are  duly  proportioned  to  each  other.  The  easy  and  the 
familiar  are  equivalents,  as  are  the  strange  and  the  diSicult. 
Too  much  that  is  easy  gives  no  ground  for  inquiry ;  too  much 
that  is  hard  renders  inquiry  hopeless. 

The  necessity  of  the  interaction  of  the  near  and  the  far 
follows  directly  from  the  nature  of  thinlcing.  Where  there  is 
thought,  something  present  suggests  and  indicates  some¬ 
thing  absent,  Accordingly,  unless  the  familiar  is  presented 
under  conditions  that  are  in  some  respect  unusual,  there  is 
no  jog  to  thinking;  no  demand  is  made  upon  hunting  out 
something  new  and  different.  And  if  the  subject  presented 
is  totally  strange,  there  is  no  basis  upon  which  it  may  sug¬ 
gest  anything  serviceable  for  its  comprehension.  When  a 
person  first  has  to  do  with  fractions,  for  example,  they  will 
be  wholly  baffling  so  far  as  they  do  not  signify  to  him  some 
relation  that  he  has  already  mastered  in  dealing  with  whole 
numbers.  When  fractions  have  become  thoroughly  familiar, 
his  perception  of  them  acts  simply  as  a  signal  to  do  certain 
things;  they  are  a  ‘  substitute  sign,’  to  which  he  can  react 
without  thinking.^  If,  nevertheless,  the  situation  as  a  whole 
presents  something  novel  and  hence  uncertain,  the  entire 
1  See  page  23S, 


291 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS 
response  ia  not  mechanical,  because  this  mechanical  opera¬ 
tion  is  put  to  use  in  solving  a  problem.  There  ia  no  end 
to  this  spiral  process:  foreign  subject  matter  transformed 
through  thinking  into  a  familiar  possession  becomes  a  re¬ 
source  for  judging  and  assimilating  additional  foreign  sub¬ 
ject  matter. 

Observation  Supplies  the  Near,  Imagination  the  Remote 

The  need  for  both  imagination  and  observation  in  every 
mental  enterprise  illustrates  another  aspect  of  the  same 
principle.  Teachers  who  have  tried  object  lessons  of  the  con¬ 
ventional  type  have  usually  found  that,  when  the  lessons 
were  new,  pupils  were  attracted  to  them  as  a  diversion,  but 
as  soon  as  they  became  matters  of  course,  they  were  as  dull 
and  wearisome  as  was  ever  the  most  mechanical  study  of 
mere  symbols.  Imagination  could  not  play  about  the  objects 
so  as  to  enrich  them.  The  feeling  that  instruction  in  '  facts, 
facta  ’  produces  a  narrow  Gradgrind  is  justified,  not  because 
facts  in  themselves  are  limiting,  but  because  facts  are  dealt 
out  as  hard  and  fast  ready-made  articles.  No  room  is  left 
to  imagination.  Let  the  facts  he  presented  so  as  to  stimu¬ 
late  imagination,  and  culture  ensues  naturally  enough.  The 
converse  is  equally  true.  The  imaginative  is  not  necessarily 
the  imaginary;  that  is,  the  um-eal.  The  proper  function  of 
imagination  ia  vision  of  realities  and  possibilities  that  can¬ 
not  be  exhibited  under  existing  conditions  of  sense  percep¬ 
tion.  Clear  insight  into  the  remote,  the  absent,  the  obscure 
is  its  aim.  History,  literature,  and  geography,  the  principles 
of  science,  nay,  even  geometry  and  arithmetic,  are  full  of 
matters  that  must  be  imaginatively  realized  if  they  are 
realized  at  all.  Imagination  supplements  and  deepens  ob¬ 
servation  i  only  when  it  turns  into  the  fanciful  does  it  become 
a  substitute  for  observation  and  lose  logical  force. 

A  final  exemplification  of  the  required  balance  between 


292  HOW  WE  THINK 

near  and  far  ia  found  in  the  relation  that  obtains  bet'ween 
the  narrower  field  of  experience  realized  in  an  individual’s 
own  contact  with  persona  and  things,  and  the  wider  experi¬ 
ence  of  the  race  that  may  become  hia  through  communica¬ 
tion.  Instruction  always  runs  the  risk  of  swamping  the 
pupil’s  own  vital,  though  narrow,  experience  under  masses 
of  communicated  material.  The  mere  instructor  ceases  and 
the  vital  teacher  begins  at  the  point  where  communicated 
matter  stimulates  into  fuller  and  more  significant  life  that 
which  has  entered  by  the  strait  and  narrow  gate  of  sense 
perception  and  motor  activity.  Genuine  communication  in¬ 
volves  contagion;  its  name  should  not  be  taken  in  vain  by 
terming  communication  that  which  produces  no  community 
of  thought  and  purpose  between  the  child  and  the  race  of 
which  he  is  the  heir. 


INDEX 


INDEX 


Absorption,  284 
Abstract,  the,  220-229;  nature 
of,  227-229;  transition  from 
concrete  to,  227;  not  the 
whole  end,  227-228 
Abstraction,  value  of,  200-201 
Activities,  in  education,  Bl-52 
Activity,  organization  of,  49- 
52;  and  thought  training, 
205-219 ;  early  stage  of,  205- 
209;  allied  forms  of,  209-215; 
and  observation,  249-250 
Adolescence,  88-89 
Aim,  see  Purpose 
Analysis,  126-131,  157-158, 

195-198 

Appraising,  131 
Appreciation,  of  new  values, 
101 ;  role  of,  in  thinking,  227- 
279 

Artist,  attitude  of  the,  287- 
288;  the  teacher  as  an,  288 
Attitudes,  importance  of,  28- 
29;  cultivation  of,  29-34;  de¬ 
velopment  of,  65-66;  see  also 
Logical  attitude 

Bacon,  Francis,  idols  of,  25-28 
Bain,  A.,  quoted,  200-201 
Behavior,  standards  in,  66 
Belief,  6-14,  32,  89;  forms  of 
wrong,  26-28;  false,  191-194 
Believing,  see  Belief 


Character,  traits  of,  33-34,  59- 
60 

Children,  mental  processes  in, 
and  behavior  of,  15-16,  21, 
36-39,  49-51,  56-57,  59-61, 
88-89, 130-131,  142, 145, 153, 
183,  205-206,  212-215,  216- 
217,  226,  246 
Common  sense,  223 
Concentration,  48 
Conceptions,  149-164;  and 
meanings,  126;  nature  of, 
149-154;  are  established 
meanings,  149-150;  and  gen¬ 
eralization,  150;  standardize 
knowledge,  150-151;  identify 
the  unknown,  152-153;  edu¬ 
cational  significance  of,  153- 
154;  how  arise,  155-159; 
begin  with  experiences,  155- 
156;  become  definite  with 
use,  156;  become  general  with 
use,  157-159;  control  of,  179- 
189;  value  of  scientific,  179- 
184;  system  in,  179-181; 
of  quantity,  181;  in  each 
science,  181-182;  playing 
with,  182-183;  final  test 
of,  183-184;  isolation  of, 
187 

Concepts,  see  Conceptions 
Concrete,  the,  220-229;  nature 
of,  220-226;  relation  of,  to 


INDEX 


296 

meaning,  221 ;  dependence  of, 
on  intellect,  221-222 
Conscious,  the,  280-284 
ConaoiouBness,  stream  of,  3-4 
Consecutiveness,  see  Order- 
linesa 

Conservatism,  193-194 
Context,  implicit  and  explicit, 
280-283 

Curiosity,  132,  227;  a  native 
tendency,  36-40;  three  levels 
of,  37-n39;  how  lost,  39-40; 
not  identical  with  wonder, 
52;  guidance  of,  56-57;  in 
projects,  218;  and  observa¬ 
tion,  248-249 

Darwin,  Charles,  cited,  152- 
153, 175 

Data,  165-178;  collection  of 
sufficient,  173-174;  see  also 
Facts 

Decision,  126 
Deduction,  186-187 
Definition,  149-164,  182,  187; 

three  types  of,  161-164 
Deliberation,  case  of  practical, 
91-92 

Disciplinary  studies,  62 
Discipline,  and  freedom,  85- 
90;  conception  of,  85-87; 
see  also  Formal  discipline 
Discourse,  consecutive,  245- 
246 

Distraction,  avoiding,  272-273 
Dogmatism,  193-194 
Doubt,  12, 15-16,  107,  109,  121, 


133,  194,  255-256;  see  also 
Uncertainty 
Drudgery,  285-286 

Education,  in  relation  to  form, 
78-85;  applications  to,  184^ 
189;  play  in,  213-215;  use  of 
language  in,  238-246 ;  see  also 
School  subjects,  Teacher 
Empirical  thought,  190-202; 
meaning  of,  190-194;  when 
useful,  191-192;  three  dis¬ 
advantages  of,  192^194 
End,  see  Purpose 
Evidence,  10-12,  123,  257-259; 

control  of,  165-168 
Experience,  meaning  of,  201- 
202 

Experiment,  reflection  involv¬ 
ing,  93-94,  113-116;  object 
of,  175-178;  three  advantages 
of,  176-178;  failure  to  pro¬ 
vide  for,  188;  and  observa¬ 
tion,  197 

Facts,  102-106,  122-125 
Familiarity,  contempt  for,  288- 
290 

Formal  discipline,  55-58 
Freedom,  83-84;  and  discipline, 
85-90;  conception  of,  87;  in¬ 
tellectual,  90 

Generalization,  28,  150,  186, 
184-185,  272-273 
Guiding  idea,  see  Hypothesis 

Habits,  certain  to  be  formed, 
89 


INDEX 


Hobhousej  L.  T.j  quoted,  37 
Hypothesis,  107,  109-111,  113- 
115,  167-168,  196 

Idea,  6,  102-106;  see  also  Sug¬ 
gestion 

Ideals,  influence  of,  64-68;  see 
also  Standards 
Ideas,  132-148 

Imagination,  5,  98,  104-105, 
202;  false  notions  of,  213- 
215;  supplies  the  remote, 
291-292 

Imitation,  role  of,  208-209 
Incubation,  284 
Inference,  91-101;  to  the  un¬ 
known,  95-98;  no  thought 
without,  95 ;  involves  a  leap, 
96;  a  factor  in  reflection, 
104;  nature  of,  128;  ideas  in, 
132-133 

Information,  acquisition  of,  53; 
relation  of,  to  mental  train¬ 
ing,  247-259;  communication 
of,  256-259 

Informational  studies,  61,  63- 
64;  see  also  School  subjects 
Inquiry,  importance  of,  12-14 
Instruction,  standards  in,  65- 
66 

Intelleotualization,  108-109,  154 
Interest,  and  projects,  218; 
transferring  of,  225-226; 
dramatic,  in  observation, 

253-255 

Interpretation,  tools  of,  132- 
134 


297 

James,  William,  cited,  139; 
quoted,  141,  198-199 

Jevons,  W.  S.,  quoted,  176-177 

Judgment,  suspense  of,  16; 
place  of,  in  reflective  think¬ 
ing,  119-131;  three  factors 
in,  119-126;  features  of,  120; 
arises  in  doubt,  121;  func¬ 
tions  of,  126-131;  and  idea, 
132-134 

Language,  relation  of,  to 
thought  training,  230-246; 
typical  views  of,  230-232;  as 
a  tool  of  thinking,  230-235; 
selects  and  applies  meanings, 
233-235 ;  relation  of,  to  edu¬ 
cation,  238-246;  see  also 
Signs,  Speech,  Vocabulary, 
Words 

Learning,  and  form,  in  thinking, 
78-79;  of  animals,  134^135; 
need  for  relationships  in,  185; 
through  communicated  infor¬ 
mation,  257-259 

Likeness,  174-175 

Linguistic  methods,  abuse  of, 
236-238 

Locke,  John,  quoted,  22,  26-28, 
239 

Logic,  71-78, 136 

Logical  attitude,  128-130 

Meaning,  and  thinking,  19-21; 
range  of,  20;  enrichment  of, 
21;  and  belief,  33;  develop¬ 
ment  of,  124-125;  and  ideas, 


INDEX 


298 

132-148;  and  things,  136- 
140;  how  acquired,  140-148; 
organization  of,  159-164;  as 
intension  and  extension,  160- 
161;  elimination  of  the  irrel¬ 
evant,  171-173;  isolation  of 
facts  from,  184^185;  ohjec- 
tive  embodiment  of,  211;  re¬ 
lation  of,  to  the  concrete, 
221;  as  object  of  thought, 
231 

Means-consequence  relation, 
146-147,  212 
Memory,  125 

Method,  88-89;  union  of,  with 
attitude,  29-34;  logical,  82- 
83;  conscious,  128-130;  of 
animal  learning,  134-135; 
systematic,  165-189;  as  test¬ 
ing,  165-168;  need  for  sys¬ 
tematized,  166-167;  in  judg¬ 
ing  data,  169-178;  in  develop¬ 
ing  abstract  abilities,  228 
Mill,  J,  S,,  quoted,  21,  123-124 

Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  158-159 
Number-forms,  60 
Number  relations,  224^225 

Object,  nature  of,  20 
Object  lessons,  225 
Observation,  5;  and  reflection, 
92-93,  102-103;  guided  by 
hypothesis,  167-168;  inter¬ 
relation  of,  with  thought, 
170;  relation  to  experiment, 
197;  relation  of,  to  mental 


training,  247-259 ;  nature 
and  value  of,  247-252;  and 
curiosity,  248-249;  and  ac¬ 
tivity,  249-250;  impelled  by 
theoretical  problems,  250- 
251;  in  scientiflc  work,  251- 
252;  methods  and  materials 
of,  252-256 ;  involves  explora¬ 
tion,  252-253 ;  should  be  dra¬ 
matic,  253-255;  of  structure 
and  function,  254r-255; 
should  become  scientific,  255- 
256;  supplies  the  near,  291- 
292 

Occupations,  discovering  valu¬ 
able,  52;  constructive,  216- 
219 

Open-mindedness,  30-31 
Orderliness,  47-52;  of  thought 
and  action,  48-49;  in  the 
schoolroom,  53;  in  actual 
thinking,  75-77 

Passivity,  evils  of,  260-262 
Perplexity,  see  Doubt 
Play,  61-52,  83-84,  209-215; 
significance  of,  209-210;  dis¬ 
tinction  between  work  and, 
212-213;  and  work,  284-287; 
should  not  be  fooling,  285 
Prediction,  117-118 
Prejudgments,  see  Prejudices 
Prejudices,  7,  30,  124 
Problem,  12-13,  15,  108-109 
Projects,  217-219 
Proof,  86;  see  also  Testing 
Purpose,  14^15, 17-18 


INDEX 


299 


Quantity,  concepts  of,  181  Review,  need  for,  189 
Questioning,  art  of,  265-269,  Rhythm,  of  intellectual  prog- 
271  ress,  140 


Readiness  to  think,  33-34 
Reasoning,  111-113;  control  of, 
179-189 

Recitation,  the,  over-systema¬ 
tization  of,  53;  and  training 
thought,  260-279 ;  false  ideas 
about,  260-262;  functions  of, 
262-26S ;  should  stimulate 
eagerness,  262-264;  should 
guide  to  habits  of  study,  264- 
268;  should  teat  acquisition, 
2GS;  conduct  of,  268-273 
Reflective  thinking,  a  chain, 

4- 5;  aims  at  conclusion, 

5- 6;  synonymous  with  believ¬ 
ing,  6-7;  impels  inquiry, 
7-9;  central  factor  in,  9-12; 
phases  of,  12-lS;  regulation 
of,  by  purpose,  14-15;  an 
educational  aim,  17-34;  basis 
of  purposive  action,  17-18; 
basis  of  inventions,  18-19; 
adds  meanings,  19-20;  proc¬ 
ess  and  product  of,  71-90; 
illustrations  of,  91-95; 
movement  of,  99-101;  goal 
of,  99-101;  analysis  of,  102- 
118;  essential  functions  of, 
106-118;  five  phases  of,  107- 
118;  place  of  judgment  in, 
119-131;  control  of,  283 

Relations,  137,  185 
Responsibility,  32-33 


Scholarship,  63 

School  conditions,  and  training 
thought,  55-68 

School  subjects,  46-47,  61-64, 
80-82, 112-113, 130-131, 143- 
145,  147-148,  181-182,  184^ 
186,  188,  191-192,  216-217, 
254r-256,  278-279,  291 
Schools,  experimental,  154, 188; 
devotion  of,  to  abstract 
thinking,  228-229;  see  also 
School  subjects 

Science,  grew  out  of  occupa¬ 
tions,  216;  and  abstraction, 
222-223;  observation  in,  251- 
252 

Scientific  method,  138, 171-178, 
195-202;  employs  analysis, 
195-197 

Scientific  thought,  190-202 
Self-expression,  83-84 
Sense-training,  225,  249-250 
Sentence,  the,  245-246 
Sidgwick,  H.,  cited,  153 
Signifying,  function  of,  10-11 
Signs,  artificial,  18-19,  232-233 ; 
linguistic,  19-20,  67, 225, 231- 
238 

Skill  studies,  61-64;  see  also 
School  subjects 
Social  adjustments,  206-207 
Social  influences,  28 
Social  status,  50 


INDEX 


300 

Speech,  207,  239-246;  see  also 
Discourse,  Sentence 
Standardized  meanings,  126; 

see  also  Conceptions 
Standards,  in  instruction,  65- 
66;  in  behavior,  66 
Stout,  G.  F.,  quoted,  237-238 
Study,  good  habits  of,  264- 
268 

Subjects,  see  School  subjects 
Suggestion,  9-10,  15,  186-189; 
a  native  tendency,  40-46; 
nature  of,  41-42;  dimensions 
of,  42-46;  ease  of,  42-43; 
range  of,  43-44;  depth  of, 
44-46;  flow  of,  56-57;  and 
reflection,  103-104;  a  phase 
of  thinking,  107-108,  110; 
idea  as,  132-136;  see  also 
Idea 

Superstition,  24r-25 
Suspense,  value  of,  253-255, 
267-268 

Symbols,  see  Signs,  linguistic 
Synthesis,  126-131,  157-159, 
197-198 

Teacher,  the,  39-40,  57-61,  84, 
292;  participation  by,  269- 
272;  function  of,  273-277; 
as  a  leader,  273-274;  need 
of  knowledge  by,  274-277; 
as  an  artist,  288 
Teaching,  art  of,  53-54 
Technical  terms,  244-245 
Tendencies,  native,  35-54;  see 
also  Curiosity,  Orderhneee 


Testimony,  see  Evidence 
Testing,  91-101;  two  kinds  of, 
97-98;  of  hypothesis,  113- 
115,  118;  method  as,  165- 
168;  of  ideas,  255-256 
Theory,  depreciation  of,  223- 
224 

Things,  136-140 
Thinking,  nature  of,  3-16;  best 
way  of,  3 ;  bad  tendencies  of, 
23-29;  physical  and  social 
sanctions  of,  23-24;  see  also 
Eeflective  thinking 
Thought,  meanings  of,  3-9; 
formal  vs.  actual,  71-78;  in¬ 
terrelation  of,  with  observa¬ 
tion,  170;  see  also  Empirical 
thought,  Reflective  thinking, 
Scientific  thought.  Training 
Training,  of  thought,  two  rea¬ 
sons  for,  22-23;  native 
resources  in,  35-54;  and 
school  conditions,  55-68;  na¬ 
ture  of,  55-57;  transfer  in, 
66-68;  and  activity,  205- 
219;  relation  of,  to  language, 
230-246;  observation  and 
information  in,  247-259 ; 
and  the  recitation,  260- 
279 

Transfer  of  training,  see  Train¬ 
ing 

Uncertainty,  importance  of, 
12-14 

Unconscious,  the,  280- -284 
Understanding,  132-164;  and 


INDEX 


meaning,  137-138;  two  modes 
of,  138-140;  antecedents  of, 
141-142 

Unlikeness,  174r-175 

Utility,  false  notions  of,  213- 
215 

Vagueness,  harmful  conse¬ 
quences  of,  159-160 

Variation  of  conditions,  196- 
197 

Vocabulary,  enlarging  the,  240- 


301 

242;  making  more  precise, 
242-245 

Whole-heartedness,  31-32 
Words,  19-20,  137,  144-146, 
233-235;  see  also  Signs,  lin¬ 
guistic,  Speech 
Wordsworth,  quoted,  36-37 
Work,  209-215;  significance  of, 
210-213;  distinction  between 
play  and,  212-213;  should 
not  be  drudgery,  285-286 


